STATES
C
USAID
T
USAID
FROM THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
ONALDE
DE
EVALUATION
USAIT/PerU Millenium Challenge Corporation (MCC)
Immunizations Threshold (ITP) Assessment
Fina Report
December 2011
This publication was produced for review by the United States Agency for International Development. It was prepared
by David Nelson (Team Leader), Rose Schneider, Pedro Jesus Mendoza Arana of Social Impact, Inc (SI) and Elvira
Beracochea of MIDEGO, Inc.
USAID'PERU MILLENIUM CHALLENGE
CORPORATION (MCC)
IMMUNIZATIONS THRESHOLD
PROGRAM (ITP) ASSESSMENT
FINAL REPORT
DECEMBER 201
This publication was produced for review by the United States Agency for International Development. It
was prepared by David Nelson (Team Leader), Rose Schneider, Pedro Jesus Mendoza Arana of Socia
Impact, Inc (SI) and Elvira Beracochea of MIDEGO, Inc.
USAID/PERU MILLENIUM CHALLENGE
CORPORATION (MCC) IMMUNIZATIONS
THRESOLD PROGRAM (ITP) ASSESSMENT
FINAL REPORT
DISCLAIMER
The authors' views expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect the
views of the United States Agency for International Development or the United
States Government.
This document was submitted by Social Impact, Inc., with MIDEGO Inc., to the United States
Agency for International Development under USAID Contract No. RAN-I-00-09-00019-00
Task Order #AID-527-TO-II- 1-00001.
Social Impact, Inc.
2300 Clarendon Boulevard Suite #300
Arlington, VA, 22201
Tel: (703) 465-1884
Fax: (703) 465-1888
info@socialimpact.com
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i
BACKGROUND
1
METHODOLOGY
3
FINDINGS
5
Overall Achievements of MCC-ITP
6
Status of immunization programs at end of MCC-ITP
10
Differences in egions/networks
19
Status of regional programs and networks today
20
Other issues affecting the status of vaccination programs
21
CONCLUSIONS
22
Factors that facilitated success in the regions/networks
22
Factors that inhibited success in the egions/networks
23
Factors that inhibited sustainability of achievements
23
RECOMMENDATIONS
24
LESSONS LEARNED
25
ANNEXES
27
Annex A - The proposed improvement and sustainability action plans for each Selected Region
28
Annex B - Statement of Work (SOW) for the Assessment, including modifications to the SOW
45
Annex C - Methodological notes, including all tools used in conducting the evaluation -
questionnaires, checklists, and discussion guides
57
Annex C.1 - Data Collection Instruments
57
Annex C.2 C-DHS Vaccination Coverage Analysis
77
Annex D List of Documents Consulted
83
Annex E List of Contacts
86
Annex F Regional comparison table
95
Annex G Other Relevant Information
104
Annex G.1 Maps of Sites Visited
105
Annex G.2 Status of Cold Room Installations
109
Annex G.3 Regional Pending Actions - Amazonas
110
Annex G.4 Reporte de la Encuesta
111
Annex G.5 Threshold Programs Lessons learned
112
Annex G.6 MCC Peru Indicators
112
ACRONYMS
AUS
Universal health insurance scheme
BCG
Tuberculosis vaccination
CD
Compact disc
C-DHS
Continuous Demographic and Health Survey
CI
Confidence Interval
COP
Chief of Party
DGE
Directorate General of Epidemiology
DIGEMID
Directorate General for Drugs and Medical Supplies
DIREMID
Regional Directorate for Drugs and Medical Supplies
DIRESA
Regional Health Directorate
DNI
National identification document
DPT3
Diphtheria-Pertussis-Tetanus vaccine, 3rd dose
EDA
Acute diarrheal disease ("Enfermedad diarreica aguda")
EPI
Expanded Program on Immunizations
GIS
Geographic information system
GOP
Government of Peru
HC
Health center
HEO
Health and Education Office of USAID/Peru
HIS
Health information system
IB
Itinerant brigade
IEC
Information-Education-Communication
IIIS
Integrated Immunization Information System
INEI
National Institute of Statistics and Informatics
ITP
Immunization Threshold Program of MCC
KAP
Knowledge-Attitude-Practice
MCC
Millennium Challenge Corporation
MED
Monitoring and Evaluation of Decentralization
MEF
Ministry of Economics and Finance
MMR
Measles-Mumps-Rubella vaccine
MOH
Ministry of Health
NGO
Non-governmental organization
NIS
National immunization strategy
OGEI
General Office of Statistics and Informatics
PAHO
Pan American Health Organization
PAN
Articulated Nutritional Program ("Programa Articulado Nutricional")
PARSALUD
Program for Support of Health Reform, The World Bank
PCM
President's Council of Ministers
PDA
Personal Digital Assistant
PDF
Portable Document Format for printing
PIP
Public investment project
POI
Operational immunizations plan ("Plan operativo para inmunizaciones")
PpR
Budget by Results ("Presupuesto por resultados")
PRONAA
National Food Assistance Program ("Programa Nacional de Asistencia
Alimentaria")
RCM
Rapid coverage monitoring
RIS
Regional immunization strategy
RM
Ministerial resolution ("Resolucion ministerial")
RO
Regular Budget ("Recursos Ordinarios")
SI
Social Impact, Inc.
SIGA
Integrated System for Administrative Management
SIS
Integrated Health Insurance scheme
SISMED
Drug information system
SNIP
National System for Public Investment
SOW
Scope of work
SPSS
Statistical Package for the Social Sciences
SWOT
Strengths-Weaknesses-Opportunities-Threat
TOT
Training of Trainers
TPM
Team planning meeting
UHF
Ultra High Frequency
UNICEF
United Nations Children' Fund
USAID
United States Agency for International Development
VDIM
Virtual Diploma for Immunization Management
VP
Vaccine preventable
WHO
World Health Organization
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
BACKGROUND
The Millennium Challenge Corporation's Immunization Threshold Program (MCC-ITP) for Peru
was implemented by the United States Agency for International Development in Peru
(USAID/Peru) and from October 2008 through February 2011, a USAID/Pe contractor
implemented the program under the following directives:
[E]xpand coverage of one-year old infants who have received immunization
against measles and the full series of three diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus (DPT3)
vaccinations, SO that immunization rates of 95% are reached in each of Peru's
regions and, thus, nationally. This assistance will focus intensive efforts on eight
regions with dispersed rural populations where coverage rates are significantly below
this goal. In addition, this activity will support strengthening of key systems required
for the Peru to sustain high vaccination rates throughout the country: training, cold
chain management and logistics, and information collection and analysis. The work
will be implemented with the government health sector at the national, regional and
local levels."
In 2006, the MCC scorecard to establish eligibility for compact grants used four indicators for
"Investing in People." One of these was Immunization Rates (IR) for measles-mumps-rubella
(MMR) and DPT3, based on World Health Organization (WHO) statistics (Annex G.6). In 2007,
the MCC scorecard for Peru showed an IR of 82% for 2005, the most recent year of available
statistics, after declining from over 95% in 1999. The MCC-ITP goal was to achieve and sustain a
95% national immunization rate according to WHO statistics. In turn, the official WHO statistics
are largely based on Ministry of Health (MOH) coverage reports.
In order to reach the immunization threshold, the MOH designed a strategy to complement the
National Immunization Strategy based on three components:
1.
Increased vaccination in eight target regions through use of Itinerant Brigades (IBs)tc access
dispersed and excluded populations
2. Strengthened vaccine logistics such as cold chain management
3. Creation of a national integrated immunization information system (IIIS)
The MCC-ITP also assisted in the design and production of communications material to generate
demand for vaccinations and provided technical assistance in the planning, budgeting, and financing
of immunizations operations.
The MCC-ITP was conducted during a period of rapid change in roles and responsibilities at the
central and regiona levels due to decentralization, which rapidly transferred many health system
functions from the central MOH to regional governments which had, and still have, uneven
capacities to carry out these functions and adapt to new roles and responsibilities.
1
MCC Immunization Project, RFTOP 527-08-009, page 3, USAID/Peru, 2008.
i
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report - Executive Summary
Frequent political turnover brought to power new officials with little experience in management of
health issues. Their inexperience caused delays in budget approval and changes in regional health
priorities.
A further complication was the rapid introduction of new vaccines into an already-crowded
vaccination schedule. The number of vaccines increased from four to fifteen in a matter of two
years, challenging financing, staff, logistics, and storage and complicating families' understanding of
their children's vaccination needs. These changes required additional personnel and training,
increased financing, installation of cold chain equipment, and effective communication with the
community.
This report examines the status of the national immunization program within four selected regions
and compares current status with end-of-project status to identify factors that inhibit or facilitate
sustained achievements in a program of this nature. It also identifies lessons learned, and
recommends next steps for the selected regions.
METHODOLOGY
Assessment methods included document review, surveys, interviews, SWOT (strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities, and threats) analyses, and direct observation. Four regions were chosen for in-depth
study, in accordance with the scope of work (SOW) and after discussions with USAID and MOH
counterparts (two regions with the highest and two with the lowest vaccination coverage rates,
according to the 2010 Continuous Demographic and Health Survey, C-DHS): Cusco, Apurimac,
Amazonas, and Puno.
The Assessment Team studied: (1) the end-of-program status of the immunization system as
documented in the implementing contractor's (Abt Associates) Final Report, interviews, and other
sources; (2) accomplishments of the MCC-ITP according to Abt reports, correspondence, and
interviews; (3) the current status of the regional immunization systems as documented in MOH and
regional documents, interviews, and observations; (4) the reported and observed strengths,
weaknesses, opportunities and threats to the immunization program in four selected regions; and (5)
draft regional sustainability plans for the selected regions, developed at a national workshop with
regional and national participants.
Interviews with key informants were conducted, using contacts suggested by USAID and local
counterparts, including USAID staff, former MCC-ITP staff, United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), central government officials, Regional Health Directorates (DIRESA), regional and local
government authorities, health facilities staff, and itinerant brigades. Despite repeated requests for
interviews, Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) officials in Washington D.C. and Lima were
unavailable to the Team.
Staffs of health networks and micro-networks were observed and interviewed in order to assess the
program based upon the eleven performance criteria stipulated in the SOW (see Annex B), and to
assess the quality of the information system. The Team conducted SWOT analyses with DIRESA,
the regional health directorate, personnel to understand success factors and constraints and to
identify critical steps for improving and sustaining the immunization system.
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report - Executive Summary
ii
After site visits, the Assessment Team consolidated and analyzed findings from the selected regions
and presented them to USAID/Peru On November 8, 2011 the Team held a workshop for key
regional stakeholders, central MOH authorities, UNICEF, PAHO, National Institute of Statistics
and Informatics (INEI), and USAID staff to present findings and elicit commitments to sustain and
strengthen the immunization system. The meeting validated the critical steps identified in the regions
and established a time schedule for carrying them out.
FINDINGS
1.
The MCC-ITP fulfilled contractual obligations, delivered high-quality products, and made
important contributions to the national immunization strategy (NIS) and regional
immunization strategies (RIS). However, due to the brief implementation period and delays,
design adjustments and mid-term corrections could not be made to address the rapidly
changing context brought about by decentralization, increasing complexity of vaccination
schedule, and new financing mechanisms. Some tasks were still in process when the program
closed and many of these tasks have not been completed.
2. Four important studies-logistics, norms and procedures, knowledge-attitudes-practices
(KAP), and information systems-were completed under the MCC-ITP, giving a clear view
of the NIS at the time of the program. Many of the studies' findings were used as inputs to
the principal activities of MCC-ITP, including strengthening the cold chain; training IB
members and RIS staff; designing and implementing the IIIS; and creating an information-
education-communication (IEC) toolbox (these studies were also used by other MOH
strategies and directorates, as well as by the Ministry of Economics and Finance (MEF).
3.
The MCC-ITP created and implemented a Virtual Diploma Immunization Management
(VDIM) course from which 856 health professionals graduated. Many of those trained (67%
of a spontaneous-response national survey) are still working in immunizations and 98%
consider that it improved their competency. However, the course was not institutionalized in
the MOH or a university and has not been continued.
4. Staffs in the selected regions were competent, motivated and qualified for the complex task
of managing the region's immunization program. Many were trained through the VDIM.
5. The NIS became stronger and very complex during the MCC-ITP, demonstrating: increased
staff and numbers of vaccines; tighter control of supplies and cold chain; better use of social
communication; and closer monitoring of coverage with the "analytic" tables and Rapid
Coverage Monitoring. Much of the improvement to NIS operations was supported by the
MCC-ITP through studies, training, and introduction of norms-for example, most regional
vaccination coordinators were trained through the VDIM, which was based on then-current
vaccination standards.
6.
The monitoring and evaluation of decentralization (MED) of 2009 provided semi-
quantitative assessments of DIRESA's assumption of regional government functions in
health. The baseline assessment found Puno (30%) and Amazonas (32%) slightly below the
median of 34% and Cusco (34%) and Apurimac (36%) slightly above it (minimum was 20%
iii
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report Executive Summary
and maximum was 62%).2 Frequent turnover among regional health directors was a source
of instability, but second-level managers were stable, experienced, and highly trained. For
example, the RIS coordinators in Amazonas and Apurimac had been in their positions for
seven and nine years, respectively, and both had completed the VDIM course.
7. The cold chain has improved in 14 of the regions, which now have functioning cold rooms
and use data loggers to monitor refrigerator and freezer temperatures. MCC-ITP-trained
technicians in the four selected regions are effectively using the MOH'S drug information
system (SISMED) and the Ministry of Finance's Integrated System for Administrative
Management (SIGA) information systems.
8. The 145 IBs trained and equipped by the MCC-ITP were a key component of the MCC-ITP
strategy, intended to reach over 500,000 rural Peruvians. However, because of their low
numbers and the difficult terrain to cover, they could not reach more than a small fraction of
that population. In comparison with IBs during the MCC-ITP implementation period,
current IBs suffer from high turnover, reduced training, and budget restrictions and as a
result are incomplete, fewer in number, and tend to work in fixed sites rather than as mobile
teams.
9. IBs are a politically important outreach service, but are being abandoned in some regions in
favor of facility-based, extra-mural service delivery, which is perceived as being more cost
effective. In three of the four selected regions, IBs have decreased from 42 to 26 in number.
10. The formalization of the IIIS in Ministerial Resolution RM 614 was delayed and came very
late in the MCC-ITP SO that IIIS implementation was not completed by the end of the
program. Without a champion for IIIS implementation to conduct training and monitor its
use, the IIIS has not been implemented beyond the initial pilot areas and is ignored in most
regions.
11. Despite increased numbers of vaccine doses reportedly administered during the MCC-ITP,
the MOH vaccination statistics for the public sector for 2008, 2009 and 2010 showed that
coverage did not reach the 95% safety threshold.
DOSES/YEAR
2008
2009
2010
COVERAGE/YEAR
2008
2009
2010
DPT3
494478
551504
548965
DPT3
92%
93%
92%
This is because the 2007 census corrected the technically questionable 2005 census and, as a
result, the population increased by nearly 10% in 2009. This raised the coverage
denominator in almost direct proportion to the increased number of vaccine doses
administered between 2008 and 2010, wiping out any improvement in coverage achieved by
the increased number of vaccine doses applied.
12. The MOH national vaccination statistics that were the basis for MCC-ITP design
assumptions and were relied upon for program monitoring cover only public facilities and
do not capture vaccinations provided by the private sector, which account for 23% of
vaccinations, according the C-DHS.3 Nonetheless, the MOH reports over 90% coverage for
2 Ministerial Resolution RM 739-2009/MINSA,
3 The team processed 2010 C-DHS data.
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report - Executive Summary
iv
the whole country-which means that either many children are receiving more than one
dose of a given vaccine, or reported doses are exaggerated In either case, the Team believes
that MOH-reported coverage rates are overestimated by nearly 20%.
13. The C-DHS reports national vaccination coverage on a cohort of children born 18 to 29
months before the survey. Thus, the 2010 C-DHS could not provide coverage information
for children born and vaccinated in 2010 and could not serve to evaluate the impact of the
MCC-ITP. The program's impact on coverage rates will not be known until 2012, when the
2011 C-DHS findings of immunization coverage for the 2010, one-year-old cohort will be
published.
14. The C-DHS sample is too small to give statistically valid comparisons of vaccination
coverage between regions Thus, the apparent differences in coverage rates between regions
cited in the SOW are inconclusive.
15. Regional teams and service providers in the selected regions, who have identified and
vaccinated virtually all children in their catchment areas, uniformly observe MOH
vaccination norms. They all complain that their assigned populations (based on 2007 census
figures) do not reflect their true catchment populations, because of migrations and seasonal
movements. Because of this assessment, INEI recently acknowledged the problem. The NIS
also recognizes this problem, and is working with regional and network immunization teams
to start local child censuses that will correct it.
16. According to the "analytic" tables produced by immunization services in health facilities and
used by RIS coordinators to monitor coverage, (i.e., the parallel immunization information
system) there are real coverage differences between facilities. These are the result of
different individua leadership and management skills and are being addressed in each region
through training and personnel actions.
CONCLUSIONS
1. Importance of timely studies for program design. Sizable time lags between design and
implementation allowed for significant changes in circumstances and affected validity of
design assumptions.
2. Validity of coverage indicators. Vaccination coverage indicators for a given year (e.g.
2009) as published by the MOH and estimates from C-DHS are not comparable or reliable
because:
MOH data are incomplete;
Coverage rate denominators are unreliable due to migrations and seasonal movements;
C-DHS estimates cover vaccinations delivered to a child cohort 18 to 29 months before
the year in question. Furthermore, the C-DHS estimates for 2010 cannot establish end-
of-project vaccination status.
3. Discrepancy between numbers of doses and coverage. The NIS reported increases in
numbers of doses of DPT3 and MMR from 2007 to 2009. While these numbers may be
overestimated, the corrected 2007 census increased the population and therefore, the
vaccination coverage denominator, thus erasing any improvement in coverage rates.
4.
Vaccination coverage differences between regions. The C-DHS estimates do not give
statistically significant differences between regions and apparent differences are probably due
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report - Executive Summary
to population migrations and seasonal movements. The one-time household survey
(CUANTO) conducted by MCC-ITP did not publish confidence intervals, so it is unknown
whether cited differences in coverage estimates between regions are statistically significant.
5.
Vaccination coverage differences between facilities. Differences in immunization
performance between facilities are likely to be the result of individual management and
leadership skills, which are monitored by regional immunization coordinators who intervene
with training and management actions.
6. Trained personnel is the most significant outcome. The large number of qualified
professionals working in key positions of the immunization system is, in great part, thanks to
the MCC-ITP VDIM. In general, the VDIM diploma has been considered in making
assignments and advancements within the immunization system.
7.
Ability to affect national systems and processes (including procurement, training,
staffing, financing, and epidemiologic surveillance) that affect sub-national program
performance and decentralized operations have been formalized in norms and ministerial
resolutions, in part due to MCC-ITP training and advocacy.
8. The IIIS, developed with MCC-ITP assistance, has not been sustained. The lack of a
functioning, effective, national information system impedes the monitoring of public and
private vaccinations. Regional immunization coordinators have developed their own manual
and computerized "parallel" systems, during and after MCC-ITP, to meet local management
information needs in public facilities. However these systems do not receive information
from the private sector and are not inputs to the national health information system (HIS),
and SO cannot contribute to a national vaccination-coverage-rate indicator.
9. Itinerant brigades as a vaccination strategy. The planned number of 145 IBs could not
and did not significantly increase vaccination coverage in the country. Currently, regional
government support for IBs in the selected regions is limited because of cost and perceived
lack of benefits and they are not a significant component of the NIS, despite announced
central-level support.
10. Roadmaps, vision, and critical steps. At the end of this assignment, each of the selected
regions had a simple, actionable plan to improve their performance and sustain their training
and cold chain management. Each plan was tailored to their unique circumstances and the
findings of this assessment. The regional plans are provided in Annex A.
The Assessment Team identified the following factors that affected sustained success:
1.
Immunization Management course prepared national and regional immunization staff at a
high level and these personnel are operating the immunization system effectively and
according to MOH norms.
2.
The President's Council of Ministers (PCM) was a strong champion for the MCC-ITP and
continued pressure for completion of cold room installations nationally after close of the
program.
4 The PCM has been a champion for cold room installation during and after the MCC-ITP (they were active while the Team was
working in October.)
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report Executive Summary
vi
3. The 30-month implementation period was too short for institutionalization of many
functions necessary for sustained success of the program.
4.
The VDIM was implemented by MCC-ITP staff, rather than through local academic
institutions that might have institutionalized the course and made it more sustainable.
5. The IIIS was officially sanctioned too late to be fully implemented and has fallen into disuse
in most regions.
6. Effects of decentralization. Regional governments, which under decentralization have
autonomy for prioritizing and budgeting immunizations activities within their regions, vary
in their capacities and support for immunizations. Additionally, the frequent turnover of
regional health directors was a source of instability, but second-level managers were stable,
experienced and highly trained. They have sustained the success of interventions
implemented by the MCC-ITP in all four selected regions.
Additionally, the MOH's dual role as both official reporter of national vaccination coverage and
steward of regional vaccination provision has not been regulated fully. The MOH does not have
a clear strategy to receive information about and report on the vaccinations provided by
institutions outside of the public sector nor does it have a consistent decentralized management
model.
RECOMMENDATIONS
A national, nominal, information system capable of collecting and reporting all public and
private vaccinations should be finalized.
The NIS' analytic immunization information system should be standardized and
implemented on MCC-ITP-donated computers for day-to-day management of vaccinations.
The VDIM should be institutionalized, either in a university or through the MOH.
Immunization has become very complex and all staff involved should take the course.
IBs as a strategy for service outreach to dispersed and excluded populations should be
evaluated, including cost and effectiveness in reaching these populations, as well IB and staff
roles within DIRESAs and contribution to immunization coverage
The IEC toolbox provides an important resource for overcoming cultural barriers to
vaccination. It should become part of the VDIM in order to be used sustainably at
operational levels.
LESSONS LEARNED
Given the short nature of MCC's threshold programs, flexibility in program design and
implementation of activities is imperative in order to achieve objectives.
5 Regional health directors were reported to have changed frequently in the last nine months as a result of the regional elections
which changed regional administrations (e.g. Puno with 3). The Team also found that people perceived greater instability due to
this turnover, however, beyond those perceptions the team does not have additional evidence that turnover is greater now than
before decentralization.
vii
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report - Executive Summary
Monitoring and evaluation indicators should measure the strategies' effectiveness and should
be timely and reliable.
Design assumptions are critical to achieving desired outcomes in the short time of a
threshold program. Sizable time lags between design and implementation allow for
significant changes in circumstances and affect validity of design assumptions.
The legal basis for interventions is very important for institutionalization, but delays in
achieving legal status can endanger implementation, especially in the short timeframe of a
threshold program.
The involvement of local authorities can increase sustainability and improve local decision-
making, local management, and service delivery processes.
Unreliable coverage indicators made monitoring of project outcomes and measurement of
impact difficult. This coincides with the first of the lessons learned as reported by MCC on
December 16, 2010:6 "Link threshold programs to indicators and goals that are actionable
and measurable within a relatively short period of time."
Untested assumptions in the MCC-ITP design, (e.g., the location of unvaccinated children)
and incomplete diagnoses, (e.g., the number of functional IBs at the beginning of the MCC-
ITP) led to outcomes and impacts below those planned in project preparation. (MCC Lesson
Two:? "Deepen diagnostic and feasibility analysis and identify the connection of activities to
outputs, outcomes and impacts during program preparation.")
For the MCC-ITP, the creation of a national immunization information system was overly
ambitious, given the institutional impediments, delays in official sanctioning, and complexity
of the undertaking, although the consultative process did allow MCC-ITP to change from
the HIS platform to the Integrated Health Insurance scheme (SIS) in order to achieve pilot
testing. (MCC Lesson Three: "Be more selective when determining program interventions
and establish a consultative process to tailor focus areas.")
The MCC-ITP outcome goal of "Integrated Immunization Information System improved
and implemented in the MOH and 1,246 Health Centers" was inappropriate for the two-year
(later increased to 30 months) timeframe. MCC Lesson Four:" "Establish outcome-level
goals that are appropriate for the timeframe."
It was assumed that the MOH and NIS would buy in to the activities of the MCC-ITP, such
as training for IBs, cold chain technicians and the VDIM. No assurance for this was built
into the program design, beyond the efforts to gain ministerial sanction for the IIIS. MCC
Lesson Six: "Build in sustainability assurances during program design and early
implementation."
MCC Threshold Program Lessons Learned, shtpllwwwncegovidocunentspreshacshet-2olooozoeeoothresho
program-lessons-learned.pdf>.
Ibid.
8 Ibid.
9 Ibid.
10 Ibid.
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report Executive Summary
viii
BACKGROUND
The Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) Immunization Threshold Program (ITP) was
designed to help the Government of Peru (GOP) achieve the immunization threshold on the MCC
scorecard in Order to make the country eligible for a MCC Compact grant. During 2006-2007 in
Peru, the President's Council of Ministers (PCM) coordinated the planning for a threshold program
to achieve "green" scores in two components: (1) anti-corruption and (2) immunization coverage.
The MCC-ITP effort was financed by MCC and the Government of Peru (GOP) financed
expansion of the national immunization program.
The United States Agency for International Development in Peru (USAID/Peru) implemented the
MCC-ITP, and from October 2008 through February 2011, a USAID/Peru contractor implemented
the program under the following directives:
[E]xpand coverage of one-year old infants who have received immunization
against measles and the full series of three diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus (DPT3)
vaccinations, SO that immunization rates of 95% are reached in each of Peru's
regions and, thus, nationally. This assistance will focus intensive efforts on eight
regions with dispersed rural populations where coverage rates are significantly below
this goal. In addition, this activity will support strengthening of key systems required
for the Peru to sustain high vaccination rates throughout the country: training, cold
chain management and logistics, and information collection and analysis. The work
will be implemented with the government health sector at the national, regional and
local levels."
In 2006, the MCC scorecard to establish eligibility for compact grants used four indicators for
"Investing in People." One of these was Immunization Rates (IR) for measles-mumps-rubella
(MMR) and DPT3, based on World Health Organization (WHO) statistics (Annex G.6). In 2007,
the MCC scorecard for Peru showed an IR of 82% for 2005, the most recent year of available
statistics, after declining from over 95% in 1999. The MCC-ITP goal was to achieve and sustain a
95% national immunization rate according to WHO statistics. In turn, the official WHO statistics
are largely based on Ministry of Health (MOH) coverage reports.
In order to reach the immunization threshold, the MOH designed a strategy to complement the
national immunization strategy (NIS), based on three components:
1.
Increased vaccination in eight target regions through use of Itinerant Brigades (IBs) to access
dispersed and excluded populations;
2. Strengthened vaccine logistics such as cold chain management; and
3. Creation of a national integrated immunization information system (IIIS)
The MCC-ITP also assisted in the design and production of communications material to generate
demand for vaccinations and provided technical assistance in the planning, budgeting, and financing
of immunizations operations.
11 MCC Immunization Project, RFTOP 527-08-009, page 3, USAID/Peru, 2008.
12 Ibid pg 19.
I
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
The MCC-ITP was conducted during a period of rapid change in roles and responsibilities at the
central and regional levels, due to decentralization that quickly transferred many health system
functions from the central MOH to regional governments with uneven capacities to carry out these
functions and adapt to new roles and responsibilities.
Frequent political turnover brought to power new officials with little experience in management of
health issues. Their inexperience caused delays in budget approvals and changes in regional health
priorities.
A further complication was the rapid introduction of new vaccines into an already-crowded
vaccination schedule. The number of vaccines increased from four to fifteen in a matter of two
years, challenging NIS financing, staff, logistics, and storage and complicating families'
understanding of their children's vaccination needs. These changes required additional personnel
and training, increased financing, installation of cold chain equipment, and effective communication
with the community.
Peru is divided administratively into 24 regions. Each region has a Regional Health Directorate
(DIRESA) that oversees regional public health programs and the provision of health services
through a number of health facilities organized into two to four operationally autonomous networks,
each with 5 to 10 micro-networks consisting of a main health center and 10 to 20 health facilities.
This report examines the status of the national immunization program within four selected regions
and compares current status with end-of-project status to identify factors that inhibit or facilitate
sustained achievements in a program of this nature. It also identifies lessons learned and
recommends next steps for the selected regions.
PURPOSE OF THE ASSESSMENT AND ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS
The purpose of this Assessment is to inform USAID/Peru, the MCC, and the GOP on the current
status of national, regional, and local immunization programs in Peru and of changes since the close
of the MCC-ITP; to identify factors that facilitate and/or challenge success of medium-term
projects, such as the MCC-ITP; and to provide actionable recommendations to increase
sustainability of MCC-ITP achievements and advances in immunizations. Specific objectives of the
assessment were to:
Determine the current functionality of the immunization system at national, regional,
and local levels, including those national systems and processes that affect sub-national
program performance or operations;
Assess the implementation of immunization program plans since the close of the MCC-
ITP;
Identify factors that affect sustained success of interventions like the MCC-ITP; and
Recommend a critical path for improvement and sustainability at regional and
local levels.
The questions to be answered in this Assessment, detailed in Annex B, are summarized below, in
three areas of focus:
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
2
1)
Regional Immunization Programs. In each selected region, the assessment shall appraise the
region's capacity to deliver, and performance in delivery of, basic vaccines for children.
a. What were the effects and achievements of the MCC-ITP in the region (at the end of
the program, February 2011)?
b. What is the post-ITP status of development of the regional immunization programs
(as of October 2011):
C. How has the regional immunization program progressed since the close of the MCC-
ITP (what happened between February and October 2011)?
2)
Immunization Performance in the Health Networks. Analysis of strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities and threats (SWOT) at the local level.
3) Improvement and Sustainability Plan. Action plans to serve as roadmaps for other regional
and local governments to use in strengthening their respective immunization programs.
In
discussions with USAID/Peru it was agreed that a roadmap would consist of a vision for the
future of the immunization programs and the critical steps needed to achieve this vision. A further
clarification of USAID's interest identified factors that might explain differences in coverage levels
between regions and networks.
METHODOLOGY
The Assessment Team developed its methodology with emphasis on the complex requirements of
the assignment. Team members initially reviewed the scope of work (SOW), the Social Impact
proposal and the MCC-ITP planning documents, with special attention to questions posed by
USAID in the SOW. In-depth document review focused special emphasis on several MCC-ITP
baseline assessments,; the MCC-ITP contractor's (Abt Associates) quarterly reports; consultant
assessments of the supply system and information system; and a mid-term evaluation, using the
project's Results Framework and the three strategic objectives as a guide.
The Team, working with Social Impact staff and technical division, held a series of virtual Team
planning meetings (TPM) that confirmed the approach of the assessment, identified additional key
documents, and selected key contacts for interviews and data collection in the U.S. and in Peru.
TPMs included in-depth discussions of the focus of the assessment and the rationale and
organization of the questions in the SOW, and further identified documents and individuals as
sources of additional information.
During review of key documents, the Team recognized that although the SOW's questions
emphasized the regions, the methodology needed to assess each level for its support to the three
project focus areas: service delivery, logistics/supply, and information systems. The Team reviewed
baseline studies, tools produced, coverage datasets and program reports for a deeper understanding
of the situation.
In-depth interviews were conducted in the U.S. with MCC-ITP contractors, including Abt
Associates, Johns Hopkins Communications Project, and the mid-term team at CAMRIS
3
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
International. The Team's Peruvian member made contact with key informants for advance notice
and scheduling of interviews in Peru, including the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO),
CARE, MOH, Ministry of Economics and Finance (MEF) and the United Nations Children Fund
(UNICEF).
In the initial meeting with USAID/Peru, the discussion clarified USAID's priorities, specific
interests, and concerns for the assessment. USAID emphasized lessons learned from the MCC-ITP
to define what should be done for better results in Peru's ongoing immunization program and how
to improve the MCC threshold process. USAID expressed particular interest in how to strengthen
regional immunization systems and capacity within the complex decentralization taking place and
voiced concern about the discrepancies between MOH and National Institute of Statistics and
Informatics (INEI) coverage figures, the expansion of the number of vaccines, and
decentralization's effect on the vaccination program.
SITE SELECTION
The Team, working with Social Impact staff and technical division, evaluated coverage levels as
presented in the SOW to select the regions with highest and lowest rates, while trying to maintain
some geographic dispersion. The Team conferred with the Peruvian consultant for advice on
security concerns in the possible selected regions and then proposed to USAID/Peru the following
regions for intensive study:
Amazonas
Apurimac
Cusco
Puno
This selection was reviewed during the first Team-briefing meeting and was approved by
USAID/Per (see Annex G.1 for maps of sites visited in the four selected regions).
The Team carried out in-depth key informant interviews with the (former) Peruvian MCC-ITP chief
of party (COP), Team members, and consultants, using key questions and prompts to cover the
three main areas (services, logistics, and information). The Team also conducted an in-depth
interview with the supply-chain-assessment 13 Team, and with representatives of other USAID-
supported health projects, USAID/Health Policy and USAID/Quality Healthcare. Introductory
meetings were held with MOH Office of Foreign Cooperation and the Health Services Directorate.
The Team prepared a short presentation to brief MOH officials in preparation for the in-depth
interviews of and data collection from individual divisions and departments that support
immunizations.
The Team met with the INEI to clarify coverage issues as well as concepts and practices
surrounding the Continuous Demographic and Health Survey (C-DHS). The Team also collected
databases from INEI and processed information from the 2010 C-DHS, using the Statistical
13 "Plan de Mejora de Cadena de Suministro de Vacunas del MOH," Dr. Hernan Garcia, Dra. Cecilia Lengua
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
4
Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) to evaluate regional vaccination coverage and associated
factors.
The Team developed tools for data collection at the levels of the regional government (President
and Social Development Manager); regional health team (Director General, Director of Health
Services, Immunization Coordinator and other departments); supply system manager; facility Teams;
and IBs. These tools are provided in Annex C.
Two surveys attempted to gather information from the other twenty regions of Peru. An instrument
was faxed by the PCM to all presidents of regional governments, and another to the regional health
directors. None responded.
Another survey questionnaire was e-mailed to the list of 1884 registrants in the Virtual Diploma
Course on Immunization Management (VDIM). Two-hundred-thirty-two participants responded
(14%); their responses were tabulated and notable quotations were extracted for this report, in
Annex G.4.
THREATS TO VALIDITY
The methodology had the following limitations:
The validity of generalizing Team observations in four regions to the seventeen regions
supported by the MCC-ITP was a limitation. Direct observations and data collection were
done in four regions; however, these were complemented with data and information
collected on other regions and on the national status of the immunization program in
document reviews, through analysis of technical reports and interviews with national
authorities.
Analysis and validation of the data on immunization coverage was a key issue. The Team
cross-checked data from the C-DHS, health information system (HIS), Integrated Health
Insurance system (SIS) and IIIS in order to "interpret the data available, attempt to ascertain
and adjust for possible biases and arrive at the most accurate estimate of immunization
coverage."
FINDINGS
The most salient results of the Team's document review, interviews and direct observations are
developed in the following sections regarding
Overall achievements of MCC-ITP
Status of immunization programs at end of MCC-ITP
Differences in regions/networks
14
USAID Immunization Essentials: A Practical Field Guide, 2003, Bos, Edward and Amie Batson, "Using Immunization
coverage Rates for Monitoring Health Sector Performance: Measurement and Interpretation Issues". HPN Discussion Paper,
Washington, D.C., The World Bank. August 2000.
5
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
Status of regional programs and networks today
Other issues affecting the status of the NIS
OVERALL ACHIEVEMENTS OF MCC-ITP
The overall, general findings on achievement of the MCC-ITP are summarized in the following
paragraphs. Specific findings related to the three MCC-ITP design components are presented in the
later sections, as follows:
1) Ensure immunizations of rural children,
2) Strengthen immunization management and logistics systems and
3) Strengthen Immunization Information System in MOH at central and decentralized levels.
The MCC-ITP fulfilled contractual obligations, delivered high-quality products, and made important
contributions to the NIS and regional immunization strategies (RIS). However, due to the brief
implementation period and external delays, design adjustments and mid-term corrections could not
be made to address the rapidly changing context brought about by decentralization, increasing
complexity of vaccination schedule, and new financing mechanisms. Some tasks were still in process
when the program closed and many of these tasks have not been completed.
Four important studies were completed under the MCC-ITP, giving a clear view of the NIS at the
time of the program: logistics, norms and procedures, knowledge-attitudes-practices (KAP), and
information systems. Many of the findings from these studies were used as inputs to the principal
activities of MCC-ITP, including strengthening the cold chain, training of IB members and RIS staff,
design and implementation of the IIIS, and creation of an information-education-communication
(IEC) toolbox (these studies were also used by other MOH strategies and directorates as well as the
MEF).
The MCC-ITP created and implemented a Virtual Diploma for Immunization Management (VDIM)
course, from which 856 health professionals graduated. Many of those trained (67% of a
spontaneous-response national survey, Annex G.4) are still working in immunizations and 97%
consider that it improved their competency. However, the course was institutionalized in neither the
MOH nor a university and has not been continued.
The Team observed and interviewed staff in the selected regions who were competent, motivated,
and qualified for the complex task of managing the region's immunization program. Many were
trained through the VDIM.
Ensure immunizations of rural children
One MCC-ITP priority was immunization of rural children using the IB strategy. Five-member IBs
provide basic health services to dispersed and excluded rural populations and were to be
strengthened by the program through the training and equipping of IBs.
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
6
145 IBs trained and equipped
The MCC-ITP trained 786 members of IBs with a series of seven training modules. The IBs are
composed of five professionals-physician nurse, dentist, obstetrician, and practical nurse. The
MCC-ITP also trained sixty-six trainers to continue preparation of future IBs.
The MCC-ITP equipped 146 IBs in all seventeen supported regions with twenty-two types of
equipment in varying amounts. Equipment included blood pressure monitors, glucose meters,
stethoscopes, fetascopes, fetal Dopplers, manual resuscitation equipment, minor surgery kits, and
other items. The MCC-ITP also provided dental tools, growth-monitoring instruments, and camping
equipment and clothing for the IBs who traveled to and stayed in remote areas where shelter and
cooking facilities were not available. Equipment initially was purchased by the MCC-ITP at the sum
of $931,680, 15 with replacement of worn and damaged equipment to be the responsibility of regional
governments and DIRESAs
In September 2008, at the beginning of implementation, the MCC-ITP found that only 23 IBs were
operational, instead of the 145 indicated in the program design. This required strong advocacy by
the MCC-ITP for the recruitment and training of additional brigades and special financing by the
GOP, all of which the MCC-ITP managed to achieve in the first months of the program.
The 146 trained and equipped IBs ensured the vaccination of the rural children in their coverage
areas. However, the number of children vaccinated by the IBs could not be determined, because the
reporting system aggregated data from IBs with those of the health facility from which they worked.
Strengthen immunization management and logistics systems
The NIS became stronger and very complex during the MCC-ITP with support from the GOP and
MCC-ITP:
7,000 health staff were contracted or appointed to health facilities to manage vaccinations,
replacing health technicians
The number of vaccines in the national immunization schedule increased from four to
fifteen
National and regional drug management authorities exerted tighter control over supplies and
cold chain
Regional immunization coordinators made better use of social communication
Regional immunization coordinators monitored coverage more closely with the analytic
tables and Rapid Coverage Monitoring
Much of the strengthening of management and logistics systems for the NIS was supported by the
MCC-ITP through studies, training and introduction of norms-for example, most regional
vaccination Coordinators were trained through the VDIM, which was based on then-current
vaccination standards.
15 Procurement Report, USAID/ITP, Abt Assoc., Lima 2009.
7
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
Studies of Immunization Management, Cold Chain and Logistics, Information System and KAP
Four important studies were completed under the MCC-ITP, giving a clear vision of the NIS at
the
time of the program: logistics, norms and procedures, knowledge-attitudes-practices (KAP), and
information systems. Many of the findings from these studies were used as inputs to the principal
activities of MCC-ITP, including strengthening the cold chain, training of IB members and RIS staff,
design and implementation of the IIS, and creation of an IEC toolbox. (These studies were also
used by other MOH strategies and directorates as well as the MEF)
Virtual Diploma course on Immunization Management
The VDIM was completed by 856 professionals, most of whom received certificates for their studies
(63% of a spontaneous-response national e-mail survey, Annex 5). The course covered six, key areas
of management of immunization programs and was highly appreciated by participants.
The course was created and conducted by MCC-ITP personnel using the MOH website platform to
disseminate course materials and receive assignments from students. MCC-ITP recruited, selected
and contracted facilitators who monitored student performance and graded their work. The
University of Trujillo certified academic credit.
Despite its success, the course was not institutionalized and has not been continued.
Cold Chain Inventory, Cold Chain Training
The MCC-ITP updated the cold chain inventory by training cold chain technicians in all regions to
enter information on cold chain assets procured after 2007 into the MEF'S Integrated System for
Administrative Management (SIGA-patrimonio) information system.
Additionally, staff of Regional Directorates for Drugs and Medical Supplies (DIREMID) in each
region was trained to use the drug information system (SISMED) to track stocks of vaccines, order
new stocks and ensure adequate provision of vaccination inputs, based on RIS annual plans.
The PCM advocated for installation and operation in all regions of cold rooms that were purchased
by the GOP in 2006. The cold rooms ensure safe warehousing of heat-sensitive vaccines received by
the regions prior to their distribution and use in health facilities.
IEC Toolbox
After completing the KAP study, the MCC-ITP achieved the planned communications and
advocacy goals with creation of the IEC toolbox, which included print and electronic materials in
five languages for adaptation and use in all regions.
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
8
The IEC toolboxes were distributed to regions in the closing days of the MCC-ITP and,
subsequently, to some health networks, but without the benefit of training in their use and
adaptation.
Strengthen Immunization Information System in MOH at central and
decentralized levels
IIIS integrated in MOH and 1246 health centers
The MCC-ITP partially achieved this output. It designed, created, and pilot tested an Integrated
Immunization Information System (IIIS) as a subsystem of the Integrated Health Insurance System
The IIIS was officially sanctioned in October 2010 for national implementation.
Pilot tests in seven micro-networks were completed successfully and statistics-information staffs in
seventeen regions were trained in the IIIS. Computers were purchased and distributed one each, to
1,246 health facilities. These computers had Windows Office and antivirus software. However, they
did not have printers (at the request of the MOH) and, in many cases, did not have Internet
connections. Nor did they have dedicated software to monitor vaccinations in the health units.
In
the pilot tests, the IIIS collected vaccination information for each child vaccinated in MOH
facilities, including data for children not eligible for SIS insurance. It produced local vaccination
reports for individual children, as well as facility-level coverage. Web reports were tested to ensure
that geo-referenced information of vaccination coverage and cold chain functionality could be
plotted on detailed maps. However, the SIS did not issue usernames and passwords to RIS
coordinators for them to be able to access the IIIS database. The IIIS never did capture vaccination
information from non-MOH services, either public or private sector.
145 IBs have PDAs and radios and use emproperly
The MCC-ITP procured and distributed 145 personal digital assistants (PDAs) to DIRESAs for
distribution to the IBs in their region. Although the original MCC-ITP program specified
procurement of radios for the IBs, the MOH determined that radios were already operational in
remote, fixed health facilities and that distribution to the IBs would duplicate installed capacity. At
MOH's request, the project was amended to include donation of PDAs for each IB instead of the
radios. MCC-ITP created specialized software for the PDAs in order to register and report
vaccinations administered by the IBs and trained in the use of the PDAs and software. The
specialized software interfaced with the IIIS-SIS, but not with the MOH's HIS.
GIS implemented in eight (selected) regions
The MCC-ITP created a geographic information system (GIS) to map vaccination coverage and cold
chain functionality, down to the micro-network level. The GIS was implemented on the WHO
HealthMapper platform and a detailed geo-referenced database was created for eight regions.
Training was held for regional statistics-information staff, as well as MOH epidemiology personnel.
The HealthMapper software and GIS database were distributed to the trained staff, along with a
detailed manual for operation.
9
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
However, after the pilot test, the SIS did not issue usernames and passwords to RIS coordinators or
epidemiology staff for them to be able to access the IIIS database and create georeferenced
vaccination information.
STATUS OF IMMUNIZATION PROGRAMS AT END OF MCC-ITP
Political support and priority accorded to vaccinations-national level
The GOP is strongly committed to vaccinations, as indicated by actions mentioned in the following
paragraphs.
Vaccinations are an integral part of the GOP's strategic commitment to decrease chronic
malnutrition in children through the Articulated Nutritional Program or Programa Articulado
Nutricional (PAN). The justification is that rotavirus and pneumococcus immunization will reduce
diarrheal and respiratory disease incidence and prevalence and thus avoid repeated, acute
malnutrition crises that result in chronic malnutrition.
The PCM, the high-level, Peruvian counterpart of the MCC, sponsored and coordinated the design
and submission of the MCC-ITP proposal. During the ITP the PCM provided support to both
components (immunizations and anti-corruption) and after the close of the MCC-ITP, the PCM
continued to monitor the installation of regiona cold rooms, insisting that regional authorities
commit funds and contract construction and connections. The Assessment Team met repeatedly
with the PCM manager for the ITP and received support from the PCM office to contact regional
authorities and organize the national immunization workshop as a part of this assessment.
Ministerial Resolution RM 457-2009/MOF of July 9, 2009 signaled MOH's approval of the
"National Scheme and Calendar of Vaccination," designed to provide and distribute fourteen basic
vaccines in the public and private sectors, and included definition of coverage indicators, their
analysis, and reporting. This resolution defined the roles and responsibilities of MOH, DIRESAs,
and health facilities.
The MEF has ensured that the high political priority assigned to vaccinations is backed by necessary
financial resources. The MEF has established the Budget-for-Results (PpR) mechanism to define
results and cost all necessary inputs for the government's high-priority, strategic programs. The
Assessment Team found that all the regional immunization coordinators accessed the MEF website
and effectively managed proposals for PpR funding, having been trained and advised by MCC-ITP.
Regional government political support and priority
Interviews with regional government authorities found political support for vaccinations. The
regional president of Amazonas identified "'vaccinations at the 100% level" as one of his three health
priorities for 2012. He mentioned radio messages as a method to increase community interest and
action to immunize the children and discussed using IBs to vaccinate dispersed, indigenous
populations. He also spoke of his desire to work with mayors to orient them on vaccination and
other health priorities, and to recognize those who improve health/vaccination indicators.
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
10
In Apurimac, the manager of social development indicated his three health priorities to be:
decreasing chronic malnutrition; decreasing intra-family violence; and increasing the population with
national identification documents (DNIs) for access to services. His target for vaccination coverage
was 95%; when meeting with local mayors, he used their coverage indicators to urge municipal and
district governments to increase their involvement in and support for vaccinations, health, and social
programs. He received monthly reports of budget execution and used these data to ask health and
education sectors about their performance. He collaborated with the MCC-ITP, was aware of
staffing and training needs, and followed the immunization reports. He collaborated with the RIS
Coordinator and will sign off on the RIS local census (needed to establish local populations for
coverage - the coverage rate denominator). When made aware of the delay in cold room installation,
he committed to working with the building contractor to complete the installation quickly.
The regional government in Puno is very supportive of immunizations as a priority. The Team met
with the development secretary and the representative for health issues, who confirmed that they are
working with the coordinator of the RIS and the Regional Health Council, particularly the regional
director of health and the regional president, to support vaccinations.
Local political support and priority
Some local officials provide support to vaccinations in public announcements and assistance with
installation of cold rooms. However, the Assessment Team's interviews confirmed the need to
educate them about the importance of vaccinations in order to step up their leadership role in urging
increased community response to vaccination campaigns. In Amazonas, the DIRESA identified the
need to engage local authorities more actively, by seeking additional funding from mayors through
the Municipal Incentives account, for example, for health facility/cold chain related and similar
construction. Currently, structured orientation/training on health priorities is not provided to local
authorities, who generally do not serve on health/social committees. DIRESA staff possess limited
training on advocacy and limited skills and experience to engage local authorities and increase their
support for vaccinations.
While not widespread in the four Selected Regions, in some districts and towns, political and
community support for vaccinations was not forthcoming and there were even negative reactions
and actual blockages. For example, the Hepatitis B vaccination campaigns were opposed by some
local authorities in Condorcanqui, Amazonas, and teachers in Puno were reported to oppose
vaccinations because they believe that this vaccine causes cancer. The Thimerosal preservative in the
influenza vaccine also provoked resistance from some local authorities and communities, and some
religious leaders. Local health and government authorities have tried to respond to negative
reactions from teachers, religious leaders, and others, but do not have convincing, consistent
messages.
Funding mechanisms
The variety of funding sources for vaccinations presents a challenge to NIS and RIS coordinators
and the network managers, who may not be aware of them or mechanisms to access them.
II
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
At the national level, funding for the NIS comes from the regular budget (RO), and covers the
purchase of vaccines (using the PAHO's revolving fund mechanism), purchase of supplies, the
distribution of vaccines to regional storage points, as well as supervision and regulation activities.
Funding for regional programs is more diverse, because it depends on regional or local capacities
and priorities and includes:
1. Regular Budget (for payroll personnel)
2. Budget-for-Results, which covers short-term, contract personnel, operational expenses, and
cold chain improvement.
3. Participatory Budgets, a mechanism mandated by law whereby regional or municipal
governments (which can also be the DIRESA or health networks), may propose projects to
be financed by the regional or local government budget. Some regions and networks utilize
this to improve cold chains and health facilities.
4.
Minor public investment projects (PIP Menor) is another mechanism whereby the National
Investment System (SNIP) allows public agencies to apply for additional funds for
investment purposes. The NIS has prepared a template that helps the RIS to apply for funds
that can be used, for example, for cold chain renewal.
Norms and Procedures
The norms and procedures for immunization programs are extensive and provide information and
guidance to regions on procedures for different activities, types of vaccines, rapid monitoring. Since
the close of the MCC-ITP, the GOP has issued a supreme decree (SD) and three ministerial
resolutions (RM) regarding immunizations. Two of the resolutions, Supreme Decree 006-2011-SA
and RM 311-2011-MOH, promote increased immunizations awareness and activities by establishing
a
"National Vaccination Day" and a "National Vaccination Week," respectively RM 565-2011
describes procedures for mop-up campaigns for polio and MMR, including the Rapid Coverage
Monitoring activity. RM 70-2011 includes a new vaccine against human papiloma virus and revised
scheduling of pneumococcus vaccination in the national vaccination schedule.
Human Resources
In
2009, the NIS obtained a special earmark from the MEF to contract additional, recently trained
health personnel to implement the national vaccination scheme at a time when new vaccines were
being introduced and coverage levels had been slipping for the past four years. Regions used these
funds to triple the number of health staff in health facilities, in many cases replacing health
technicians, who had little training in vaccination procedures.
Improved quality of service, including observation of norms for placement of injections and
improved counseling, is attributed to this increase in quantity and quality of professional staff.
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
12
Managerial and administrative capacity to plan and implement and monitor
immunizations
The regional immunization coordinators of the selected regions had all taken the VDIM course and
were very well versed in all aspects of planning, implementation, and monitoring of their RIS. All
had prepared annual operational plans, had presented budgets using the PpR system, had planned
and conducted trainings for facility staff and cold chain operators, and were monitoring not only
vaccination coverage at network and micro-network levels, but also their levels of budget execution
and achievement of results specified in the PpR. Additionally, they indicated specified staffing levels
and competencies for facilities and participated in contracting, as well as evaluation, of vaccination
personnel.
Similarly, many of the network immunization coordinators of the selected regions had taken the
VDIM course. They, in turn, had prepared their own annual operational plans and budgets in the
PpR system, trained facility staff, and monitored vaccination coverage rates in their network and
micro-networks, as well as achievement of results planned in the PpR.
At the facility level, vaccination supervisors were well trained and experienced in administering
vaccines, counseling, and recording their activities. All were up to date on the national vaccination
schedule and monitored their cold chain to assure availability of vaccines, syringes and associated
materials. The Team noted, however, that the assistants to the vaccination supervisors had more
limited training and were less able to manage the full range of the vaccination program
responsibilities. When discussed with NIS managers, they agreed that managerial capacity at the
network level needed to be strengthened for more in-depth capacity.
Information and epidemiologica surveillance
The MOH Epidemiology Directorate (DGE) has a four-person unit devoted to surveillance of
vaccine preventable (VP) diseases. The DGE issues weekly epidemiological bulletins with a section
on VP diseases, including whooping cough, diphtheria and tetanus (DPT), flaccid paralysis (polio),
measles, and mumps, as well as acute diarrheal disease and respiratory infections, especially
pneumonia. They do not participate in decisions about which vaccines are needed, as discussed in
the section below.
Degree of protection achieved, level of risk and epidemic potential
There are two principal concerns reported by the VP disease surveillance unit:
1.
Pockets of unvaccinated populations, especially in border regions (the measles outbreak in
Ecuador is of major concern because of reportedly low levels of MMR vaccination rates in
Condorcanqui and Jaen, on Peru's northern border).
2. The number of susceptible persons who do not react to vaccination, i.e., do not make
antibodies after vaccination and are therefore not protected by the vaccine against disease.
Based on international experience the DGE estimates that in Peru there are 300,000 such
16 For example, Deficiency of the Humoral Immune. Response to Measles Vaccine in Infants Immunized at Age 6 Months,
JAMA, 1998. httpiljama.ama-assn.orglcontent/280/6527.hull.pd
13
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
persons susceptible to mumps and measles and perhaps 500,000 susceptible to polio.
Complete serological studies have not been conducted in Peru.
The National Institute of Health has suggested that a serological study could be conducted to
determine levels of susceptibility and reasons for lack of immunological response. Such a study
might cost as little as $10,000.
Involvement of national surveillance system in detecting and controlling vaccine-preventable
(VP) diseases
The VP disease surveillance unit is responsible for monitoring and investigating all reported cases of
VP diseases from over 7,000 health facilities in the country, through trained regional
epidemiologists.
The VP disease surveillance unit commented on the selection and introduction of new vaccines in
the national immunization schedule, pointing out that baseline immunological studies were not
performed because Peru does not have laboratory diagnostic capability to analyze the DNA of
disease genotypes. Thus, decisions about new vaccines were based on studies from other countries,
which have other epidemiological conditions. They opined that vaccination should be focused on
diseases that cause, or potentially cause, high mortality. However, the DGE does not participate in
the NIS Advisory Committee, which makes decisions about which vaccines to include in the
national schedule, and therefore does not have a voice in changes to the vaccination strategy.
When the Assessment Team asked about the MCC-ITP's impact on increasing vaccination levels,
the VP surveillance unit stated that vaccination coverage rates were three to four percent higher in
the MCC-ITP target regions.
To support the national VP surveillance system, the MCC-ITP program developed the GIS
information system and trained professionals in the DGE in its use. Unfortunately, as explained
above, after training VP surveillance personne did not have access to the IIIS and GIS databases to
conduct the surveillance.
Cold chain functionality
The PCM has been insisting vigorously on installation of the 52 cold rooms purchased in 2008 by
the MOH for central and regional sites. Since the purchase price only covered equipment and not
installation, each region was responsible for construction and electrical connections. Annex G.2
provides data from NIS on the status of the installation of the cold rooms across all regions with
data on the sites, numbers of cold rooms, and functionality, as well as the status of the construction
or placement within existing structures. This report shows 29 (56%) of the cold rooms functioning
and nine (17%) classified as not functioning (i.e. correctly installed and functional but missing some
external component or service, such as a voltage stabilizer). Another 14 (26%) cold rooms were
considered non-functional (i.e. not completely built or installed) for various reasons.
17 Interview with VP disease surveillance unit, DGE/MOH, Lima 2011.
18 Interview with Cesar Cabezas, Director of National Institute of Health, Lima 2011.
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
14
To assess the status of cold rooms in the four selected regions, the Team met with the PCM,
Directorate of Drugs and Medical Supplies (DIGEMID), NIS and regional staff. Table 1 shows the
current status of the cold rooms in the selected regions visited.
Table l: Status of cold rooms in selected regions
COLD ROOMS AS OF
REGION
STATUS
OCTOBER 201
AMAZONAS
Completed October 2010
Operating
APURIMAC
Not functioning
Installed but lacking electrical connection
CUSCO
Two operating since 2010
Operating
PUNO
Non-functional
Building under construction
To complete the electrical installation of the cold room in Apurimac, the contractor will be
contacted by the regional manager for social development and it should be functioning by the end of
2011. In Puno, due to the construction of a new building to house the cold room, the cold room is
non-functional. The installation in Puno is expected to be functioning in 2012.
In 2008, the responsibilities of the DIGEMID for cold chain management were transferred to the
regional governments, where the cold chain coordinator in each DIRESA now controls the
inventory of refrigerators and freezers for vaccination storage throughout the region. In an
upcoming meeting, the Intergovernmental Health Commission will discuss strengthening regional
staff competencies to manage the cold chain and DIGEMID plans to issue a directive in December
2011 that will clearly identify the appropriate cold chain roles and functions at the central, regional
and local levels.
The Team's observations of the cold chain functionality in the sixteen facilities in the four regions
was done with a structured assessment tool and revealed the following:
All of the sixteen facilities visited store vaccines in refrigerators and freezers that are new
(between two and five years old), are electric, and function adequately (consistent
temperatures according to norms). In some areas of the regions, e.g., rural Apurimac and
Puno, there are still a number of domestic/household refrigerators; reportedly, these are to
be replaced within the next year. All cold chain equipment is registered in the MEF'S Asset
Information System (SIGA patrimonial). Maintenance is provided by the DIREMID on a
rapid-response basis in all regions to resolve problems with the cold chain equipment.
Preventive maintenance programs are not in place, although in Apurimac, a preventive
maintenance plan is nearly completed All staff report cleaning and defrosting the
refrigerators-som each month, others when ice forms inside. In general, there is not a
schedule posted for this cleaning and defrosting.
All staff in the facilities reported that they have adequate stock for routine vaccinations.
However, a small percentage does not have adequate stock for campaigns in their micro-
networks. Most micro-networks and facilities' staff report that they can easily get additional
stock from their DIRESA and brief stock-outs were reported in only a few establishments.
15
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
Most reported that they had been trained in cold chain management and all staff report using
MOH norms as their guide to managing the cold chain. These norms are available in
summary form in hard copy in all establishments and some have a full version of the norms
as an electronic copy.
All the refrigerators and freezers had thermometers on the front; most also had small
thermometers inside the refrigerators and freezers, and all have data loggers to monitor the
temperatures of the equipment. The refrigerators and freezers did not have alarms; however,
a
new type of refrigerator, soon to arrive, reportedly comes with alarms. All the
establishments visited were monitoring and recording temperatures, which were found to be
within the acceptable range for safe vaccine storage. Only a few facilities reported damaged
vaccines, which were returned to the DIRESA. During the visit to one rural micro-network,
a
power outage occurred and the Team observed staff frequently monitoring the
temperature in the refrigerator, which rose rapidly The staff prepared for the transfer of
vaccines to thermos boxes and monitored the temperature of the vaccines in the thermos
boxes using the data logger. (The temperature should not have risen as rapidly as it did and
this machine was to be checked by the technician.)
Only a very few sites visited had received voltage stabilizers to protect the cold chain
equipment from spikes in electric power that could damage the equipment. A number of the
freezers and refrigerators were connected to extension cords instead of directly into outlets,
and often wires were crisscrossed across the floor near the equipment. Few sites had marked
the outlet/plug "do not unplug," and in two rooms, the refrigerators and freezers were in
areas where unauthorized persons could enter.
For further data on cold chain functioning at the regional level, the Team obtained the "February
2011 Inventory of Cold Chain Equipment" for the Apurimac region. The data revealed that there
were, as of February 2011, 241 refrigerators across 305 facilities (some have two). Another 64
establishments do not have refrigerators, perhaps due to the small number of children in their
catchment area. The vast majority of the refrigerators are powered by electricity and fifteen are solar
powered Of the 241 refrigerators in the region, 131 (54%) were put into service before 2000.
Biosecurity practices
The Team observed biosecurity practices as part of its assessment of the facilities, using the
structured survey tool. The Team found that all facilities used disposable syringes and most had
autoretractible syringes, at least for the tuberculosis vaccination (BCG). Availability varied across
facilities. Most immunization services discarded their syringes (without recapping them) into MOH-
provided, cardboard security boxes made with a small hole at the top for discarding used syringes,
but not allowing a hand to enter. Most immunization services discarded empty vaccine ampoules in
the security boxes with the syringes.
Some facilities, especially in the urban areas, did not have a place to discard or destroy filled security
boxes. In rural areas, the security boxes were put into fenced pits and sometimes were set on fire by
staff. A few urban facilities took their filled security boxes to a nearby hospital to have them
incinerated with the hospitals' other refuse. Others are awaiting agreements with municipalities to
dispose of medical waste. In one facility, the staff was storing the filled security boxes because the
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
16
hospital did not have an incinerator or other disposal mechanism and they feared putting the filled
security boxes into the regular trash collection.
Achievements in social communication and user satisfaction.
NIS and MCC-ITP worked closely to develop activities to strengthen and improve communications
surrounding vaccinations. The MCC-ITP social communication component was developed using
evidence from the MCC-ITP KAP study, presented in 20101 to MOH technical personnel,
including regional staff and other organizations. This baseline study was conducted with the express
purpose of providing information to health professionals at several levels and to IB teams regarding
the knowledge, attitudes, beliefs and actions of mothers, fathers, family members, local leaders,
teachers, and others that affect their acceptance and seeking of vaccinations. This study was a key
component of the MCC-ITP baseline assessment of the immunization system and was the evidence
base for later work with the media to increase their commitment and their actions in support of
immunizations.
The final quarterly report from MCC-ITP stated that "community-level communication and
education campaigns for behavior change regarding immunizations were implemented in all
seventeen regions." Print and video communications materials, customized to specific findings of
the KAP study, currently are being used in vaccination campaigns. In addition, materials for nominal
community monitoring of vaccinations (vigilancia comunitaria) were delivered to regional governments
and have been distributed to health facilities at the community level. Finally, a political advocacy
video was created to draw national attention to and promote understanding of the work of IBs and
the need to reform the health-care model in areas where "itinerant brigades are the only alternative."
An
IEC Toolbox2 was developed as a guide for health staff to communicate with patients; other
tools were for communications staff and the media. The Team reviewed the Toolbox and found a
series of targeted instructions developed for social actors, media, health workers, and users, families,
and communities. Television spots were developed with four messages in five languages; the same
message was also prepared as radio spots in five languages. Material in the toolbox repeated the
primary message, "La mamd sabeuna es ninguna. Todas las vacunas para Su edad. TacunaloP'
A brochure developed by the national Health Promotion Directorate contained a series of eighteen
themes for school-aged children, with lessons taught by their teachers. The children, in turn, were to
discuss these themes with their parents at home. The brochure was included in the toolbox, even
though vaccination was the very last theme. The message, to receive all vaccinations before two
years, did not support the focus of NIS, which promotes all vaccines according to age.
The Team's observations in the four regions found very limited availability and use of the IEC
Toolbox, although reportedly, 200 copies were distributed by the MCC-ITP. A few copies were
available, mostly in the DIRESAs and urban micro-networks, but interviews revealed that they had
not been used to develop communication or health promotion plans or activities. However, the
19 "Si Su Nino Esta sano, Nosotros Somos Mejores, Conocimientos, Actitudes y Practicas en Turno a la Vacuna, Estudio
Cualitativo," Programa MCC-ITP Abt Assoc., Lima 2011
20 Tercer Informe Treimestral, Programa MCC-ITP Abt Assoc. Lima 2010
21 Caja de Herramientas Comunicacionales. Programa MCC-ITP Abt Assoc. Lima 2011
17
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
communications director of IRESA/Apurimac has used the brochures and other tools, in Spanish
and in Quechua. She informed the Team that she has plans to train 100 newspaper media persons
and give them the messages after these are properly adapted for the region.
The technical norm for IBs22 noted that the training would include themes of health promotion and
intercultural approaches. One of the seven MCC-ITP training modules for IB teams was focused on
communications. The one IB team interviewed did not use the IEC tools in its work.
In health facilities, the Team observed health staff communicating with parents whose children were
being vaccinated. They communicated actively, explaining the vaccinations, discussing any adverse
reactions to be expected, counseling on home-based care of fever, swelling, and pain. Nurses also
reviewed the vaccination schedule with the parents, explaining and marking the date of the next visit
on the growth chart. No negative communications by staff were observed and, in general, their
interactions were warm and supportive to the parents.
The Team's discussions with parents after the vaccinations found that, although the nurse explained
the vaccination schedule, parents were not able to say which vaccines had been administered. This
perhaps is due to the large number of vaccines and to names unrelated to the diseases they prevent.
The Team also observed that communications were generally one-way, from the staff to the mother,
and staff did not appear to be able to draw mothers into dialogue.
Regional capacity to adapt to new demands generated by health reform,
decentralization, technologies, insurance, etc.
RIS coordinators and related staff show strong interest in addressing the new demands generated by
the many changes in the health and political systems and in technologies. For example, in Puno, the
DIRESA vision and mission statements prioritized the broader integrated/family health intervention
as defined in the MOH family health model23.
The demands of decentralization, health insurance schemes, and other technologies also require
adaptation. For example, RIS staff develops and adapts the regional plan based on national norms to
produce their RIS, which defines implementation mechanisms: staffing, timelines, budgets,
supervision, and indicators for monitoring. Some of the regions are further along in this adaptation
process. These regional adaptations were collected in the operationa immunization plans (POI) in
the four regions visited. In the Puno POI, the Team found well-developed presentations based on
MOH norms regarding immunization schedule, priority vaccines, historical coverage by districts
(Pentavalente 3 and SPR 2003-2009), RIS organizational and functional structure, staffing, and
resources. The POI included the targets, strategies, activities and the specific targets by quarter and
persons assigned as responsible, as well as a calendar of activities and a budget. The Puno POI
demonstrates how staff adapts, assuming responsibility under decentralization for defining the
specifics of their planning and programming, and assigning responsibilities for implementation.
Another example is adoption of new technologies, such as autoretractable syringes, adaptation to
increased storage requirements of mono-dose vaccines, the use of data loggers with digital computer
2Norma Tecnica: Atencion Integral de Salud a Poblaciones Excluidas y Dispersas. (pg 23) RM-478-2009/MOH, Lima 2009.
23
Modelo de Atencion Integral de Salud Basado en familia y Comunidad, RM No. 464-2011, MINSA, Lima.
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
18
readouts to monitor temperatures of the horizontal refrigerators and freezers, and the use of cell
phones to notify parents of pending vaccinations for their children. The Condorcanqui region
adapted upright refrigerators SO they would lie horizontally and adapted condensers to work with
solar power.
Personnel readily adopted distance-learning technology for the VDIM course and all staff
interviewed had personal e-mail addresses, although many facilities were not yet connected to the
Internet. The Amazonas DIRESA used technology to develop the NovaHIS software for its health
information system. The regional president of Amazonas discussed the use of the bar codes on the
DNI to give access to social services and allow tracking of immunizations and other services.
DIFFERENCES IN REGIONS/NETWORKS
An important consideration in the achievements of the MCC-ITP and this assessment was the
effects of decentralization on regional immunization programs. The MOH implemented a
monitoring and evaluation of decentralization (MED) program in 2009 to assess the assumption of
regional government functions in health by DIRESAs. The baseline assessment found a median of
34% of regional competency: Puno (30%), Amazonas (32%), Cusco (34%) and Apurimac (36%).
These levels compare to a minimum of 20% and maximum of 62% in other regions. Thus, in 2009,
there were no great differences in regional management and administrative capacity between the
selected regions at the time of the MED.
The Assessment Team observed virtually universal compliance with national vaccination norms in
networks, micro-networks and facilities which ensure that service delivery is uniform across regions
and networks. The Team attributed differences between facilities to individual management and
leadership qualities of staff.
Regional management of the immunization strategy was also uniform. Coordinators had been
trained in the virtual diploma course and were skilled in the use of the SIGA-PpR for planning and
budgeting Levels of staffing were proportional to served populations and monitoring plans were
similar. All regions had annual operational plans, monitored vaccination coverage in networks and
facilities, conducted training and moved staff to optimize skills.
MOH vaccination norms are uniformly observed by regional Teams and service providers who have
identified and vaccinated virtually every child in their catchment areas. They all complain that their
assigned populations (based on 2007 census figures) do not reflect their true catchment populations
because of migrations and seasonal movements. As a result of this assessment, the problem recently
has been recognized by INEI. The NIS also acknowledges this problem and is working with
regional and network immunization Teams to start making local child censuses that will correct it.
Regarding the VDIM, almost 25% of participants gave their residence as Lima- with 5.2% from
Puno, 2.8% from Cusco, 1.9% from Apurimac and 1.40 from Amazonas. Many of the VDIM
graduates are still working in immunizations (67% of a spontaneous-response, national e-mail
survey, Annex 5) and 98% consider that it improved their competency.
19
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
The frequent turnover of regional health directors was a source of regional instability, but second-
tier managers were stable, experienced and highly trained. For example, the RIS coordinators in
Amazonas and Apurimac had been in their positions for seven and nine years, respectively, and both
had completed the VDIM course.
According to the analytic tables produced by immunization services in health facilities and used by
RIS coordinators to monitor coverage, (i.e., the parallel immunization information system) real
coverage differences between facilities exist. These are the result of different individual leadership
and management skills and are being dealt with in each region through training and personnel
actions.
The important differences between the selected regions are related to:
Adoption of the IIIS in Apurimac and rejection or disuse in Amazonas, Puno and
Cusco. The rejection of the IIIS in Amazonas has more to do with the personal objectives
of the Statistics Director and the implementation of a nominal HIS that he designed. In
Puno and Cusco, it appears that disuse is due to lack of a champion to promote continued
expansion from pilot micro-networks to the rest of the region.
Level of support to IBs. After the exceptiona injection of funds from MEF in 2008 to
regions in support of IBs, further responsibility for financing has been left to the regional
governments and DIRESAs. Individual directors of health have had different views of the
IBs and their frequent turnover has precluded establishment of stable policies. In the
absence of clear priorities, the IBs have languished, with reductions in number in three
regions (Amazonas, Apurimac and Puno) and only Cusco maintain its five IBs.
Installation and operation of cold rooms in Cusco and Amazonas VS. delayed
installations in Apurimac and Puno. This difference is one of time: both Apurimac and
Puno are completing their installations and both cold rooms will be operational in early
2012.
The use the IEC Toolbox by the institutional image communications officer in Apurimac
and relative disuse in Amazonas, Puno and Cusco. The communications officer took
individual initiative to utilize the Toolbox. In the other regions, the health promotion
director held responsibility and had ignored the toolbox.
Presence of anti-vaccination groups in Puno and Amazonas, especially motivated by
community opinion leaders, viz: teachers and religious figures.
Communications and advocacy with local governments. The differences observed were,
again, more attributable to individual initiative than to institutional capacity. That being said,
a clear, social-communication objective and appropriate materials and training could make a
more uniform advocacy program.
STATUS OF REGIONAL PROGRAMS AND NETWORKS TODAY
The four observed, regional-immunization programs followed NIS norms, were well staffed, and
have operational plans and excellent institutional support. All RIS coordinators are experienced and
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
20
well trained, and manage their programs effectively including staffing, planning and budgeting. All
had good relations with regiona and/o local governments.
Of the VDIM graduates, 67% are still working in various immunization activities in their regions,
according to the email survey conducted by the assessment (Annex 5) and 97% consider that it
improved their competency.
Cold chains are all effective (despite non-operational cold rooms in Puno and Apurimac) and stock
outages are minimal DIREMID staff in each selected region is monitoring temperatures using data
loggers and is controlling vaccine stocks using the SISMED information system. These digital
controls are more precise than analog thermometers and paper records provide a history of
temperature changes over several days and weeks. These have been enthusiastically adopted by cold
chain technicians after appropriate MCC-ITP training and have strengthened the immunization cold
chain.
The 145 IBs trained and equipped by the MCC-ITP were a key component of the MCC-ITP
strategy, intended to reach over 500,000 rural Peruvians. However, because of their low numbers
and the difficult terrain to cover, they could not reach more than a small fraction of that population.
In comparison with IBs during the MCC-ITP implementation period, the current IBs suffer from
high turnover, reduced training and budget restrictions and, as a result are incomplete, fewer in
number and tend to work in fixed sites rather than as mobile teams.
The delayed formalization of the Integrated Immunization Information System in Ministerial
Resolution RM 614 came very late in the MCC-ITP SO that implementation was not completed by
the end of the program. Without a champion for IIIS implementation to conduct training and
monitor its use, the IIIS has not been implemented beyond the initial pilot areas and is ignored in
most regions.
Issues yet to be resolved in all regions are:
Definition of regional and local coverage populations
Disposal of medical vaccination waste
Unification of remunerations for similar work under different contractual conditions
OTHER ISSUES AFFECTING THE STATUS OF VACCINATION PROGRAMS
Validity of Coverage Indicators:
Despite increased numbers of vaccine doses reportedly administered during the MCC-ITP,
the MOH national vaccination statistics for 2008, 2009 and 2010 showed that coverage did
not increase significantly and failed to reach the 95% safety threshold goal.
DOSES/YEAR
2008
2009
2010
COVERAGE/YEAR
2008
2009
2010
DPT3
494478
551504
548965
DPT3
92%
93%
92%
21
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
This is because the 2007 census corrected the technically questioned 2005 census used as the
baseline when designing the MCC ITP and, as a result, the population as reported in 2009
increased by nearly 10 percent. This raised the coverage denominator (which is calculated by
the MOH General Office of Statistics and Informatics (OGEI) for future years) in almost
direct proportion to the increased number of vaccine doses administered between 2008 and
2010, wiping out any improvement in coverage rate.
The MOH national vaccination statistics, which were the basis for MCC-ITP design
assumptions and were relied upon for program monitoring, cover only public facilities and
do not capture vaccinations provided by the private sector, which account for 23% of
vaccinations, according the C-DHS24 Nonetheless, the MOH reports over 90% coverage for
the whole country, which means that either many children are receiving more than one dose
of a given vaccine, or reported doses are exaggerated. In either case, MOH-reported
coverage rates are overestimated by nearly 20%.
CONCLUSIONS
FACTORS THAT FACILITATED SUCCESS IN THE REGIONS/NETWORKS
1. Trained personnel is the most significant factor for success. The large number of
qualified professionals working in key positions of the immunization system is, in great part,
thanks to the MCC-ITP VDIM. In general, the VDIM diploma has been considered in
making assignments and advancements within the immunization system.
2. Excellent MCC-ITP regional coordinators facilitated success in the regions and gained
support from both regional and local governments as well as network and facility staff.
3.
Strong and continued, high-level support from the PCM and MOH was a factor in the
success of achieving special financing for IBs and for insisting on cold-room installation in
regions that had not done SO by the end of the MCC-ITP.
4.
The declaration of immunizations as a priority program under the strategic Programa
Articulado Nutricional (PAN) to reduce malnutrition and the application of Budget-for-
Results to finance the NIS and RIS were key factors for continued and increased financing
for immunizations in all the regions.
5. Ability to affect national systems and processes (including procurement, training,
staffing, financing and epidemiologic surveillance) that affect sub-national program
performance and decentralized operations have been formalized in norms and ministerial
resolutions, in part due to MCC-ITP training and advocacy.
6.
Need for manual and computerized "parallel" systems, during and after MCC-ITP, to
meet local management information needs in public facilities, but these systems do not
receive information from the private sector and are not inputs to the national HIS SO cannot
contribute to a national vaccination-coverage-rate indicator.
24 The team processed 2010 C-DHS data.
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
22
7. Broad participation of health professionals in trainings that led to prioritization of the
immunization system at the national and regional levels and effective operation of the
immunization program
FACTORS THAT INHIBITED SUCCESS IN THE REGIONS/NETWORKS
The MOH'S dual role as both official reporter of national vaccination coverage and steward of
regional vaccination provision has not been fully regulated. The MOH does not have a clear
strategy to receive information about and report on the vaccinations provided by institutions
outside of the public sector nor does it have a consistent decentralized management model.
1. Reliance on government approval actions. The MOH took unexpectedly long to
officially sanction the IIIS too late for it to be fully implemented. As a result, it has fallen
into disuse in most regions. The lack of a functioning, effective, national information system
impedes the monitoring of public and private vaccinations.
2. Itinerant brigades as a vaccination strategy. The number of IBs (145 at the end of MCC-
ITP) could not and did not significantly increase vaccination coverage in the country.
Currently, regional government support for IBs in the selected regions is limited because of
cost and perceived lack of benefits and they are not a significant component of the NIS,
despite announced central-level support.
3. The 30-month implementation period was too short for institutionalization of many
functions, such as the IIIS and VDIM course, follow up was not pursued beyond the end of
the ITP.
4.
Effects of decentralization. Regional governments, which under decentralization have
autonomy for prioritizing and budgeting immunizations activities within their regions, are
not uniformly supportive of vaccinations. In addition, the frequent turnover of regional
health directors was a source of instability, but second-tier managers were stable,
experienced and highly trained. They have sustained the success of interventions
implemented by the MCC-ITP in all four selected regions.
8.
Lack of timely studies for program design. Sizable time lags between design and
implementation allowed for significant changes in circumstances and affected validity of
design assumptions.
FACTORS THAT INHIBITED SUSTAINABILITY OF ACHIEVEMENTS
1.
The VIDM was not institutionalized by MOH or university, which would have made it
more sustainable.
2.
Institutional rivalries led to non-ownership of IIIS and disuse of reports. The SIS
hosts the IIIS software but does not feel responsible for regional implementation or
continued updates based on changes in norms and regulations. The OGEI is responsible for
25 Regional health directors were reported to have changed frequently in the last nine months as a result of the regional elections
which changed regional administrations (e.g. Puno with 3). The Team also found that people perceived greater instability due to
this turnover, however, beyond those perceptions the team does not have additional evidence that turnover is greater now than
before decentralization.
23
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
immunization statistics from its own HIS and does not use SIS reports. There is no
champion to continue use of the system.
3. Late approval of legal status of IIIS led to incomplete implementation. No further
extension of the IIIS occurred after pilot tests at the end of the MCC-ITP.
4.
Regional priorities not supportive of IB. In the face of competing financing
requirements, IBs have become a second priority in three of the four regions.
5.
Lack of valid of coverage indicators. The sustainability of vaccination achievements
cannot be measured, because coverage indicators from the MOH and estimates from C-
DHS are not comparable:
- MOH data are incomplete.
Coverage rate denominators (assigned population) are unreliable due to migrations
and seasonal movements.
-
The C-DHS collects data on vaccinations delivered to a child cohort 18 to 29
months before the year in question. Thus, the C-DHS estimates for 2010 cannot
establish MCC-ITP end-of-project vaccination status and cannot be compared to
MOH figures for 2010.
-
Discrepancy between numbers of doses and coverage: The NIS reported increases in
numbers of doses of DPT3 and MMR from 2007 to 2009. While these numbers may
be overestimated, the corrected 2007 census increased the population and therefore,
the vaccination coverage denominator, thus erasing any improvement in coverage
rates.
-
Vaccination coverage differences between regions. The C-DHS estimates do not give
statistically significant differences between regions and apparent differences are
probably due to population migrations and seasonal movements. The one-time
household survey conducted by MCC-ITP did not publish confidence intervals SO
differences in coverage estimates between regions are ambiguous.
RECOMMENDATIONS
A national, nominal information system capable of collecting and reporting all public and
private vaccinations should be finalized.
The NIS' analytic immunization information system should be standardized and
implemented on MCC-ITP-donated computers for day-to-day management of vaccinations
in all of the regions.
The VDIM course should be institutionalized, either in a university or through the MOH.
Immunization has become very complex and all staff involved should take the course.
IBs as a strategy for service outreach to dispersed and excluded populations should be
evaluated, including cost and effectiveness in reaching these populations, as well IB and staff
roles within DIRESAs and contribution to immunization coverage.
The IEC Toolbox could be an important resource to overcome cultural barriers to
vaccination. It should become part of the VDIM, in order to be used sustainably at
operational levels.
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
24
ROADMAPS, VISION AND CRITICAL STEPS
At the end of this assignment, each of the selected regions had a simple, actionable plan to improve
their performance and sustain their training and cold chain management. Each plan was tailored to
their unique circumstances and the findings of this assessment. This report provides the regional
plans in Annex A.
LESSONS LEARNED
Given the short nature of MCC's threshold programs, flexibility in program design and
implementation of activities is imperative in order to achieve objectives Adjust MCC
Threshold plans according to changes in interval between design and implementation.
Ownership of program activities by the host country is imperative for sustainability and must
be planned for in the design. Handover is not the same as ownership. The brief nature of
MCC-ITP means that it is implemented at a much faster pace than host country institutional
activities.
Monitoring and evaluation indicators should measure the strategies' effectiveness and should
be timely and reliable. Unreliable coverage indicators make monitoring of project outcomes
and measurement of impact a difficult task. This coincides with Lesson one of Lessons
Learned reported by MCC on December 16, 2010:2 "Link threshold programs to indicators
and goals that are actionable and measurable within a relatively short period of time."
Where the legal basis for interventions is important for institutionalization, but delays in
achieving legal status can endanger implementation, especially in the short timeframe of a
threshold program.
Rigorously evaluate design assumptions. Design assumptions are critical to achieving desired
outcomes in the short period of a threshold program. Sizable time lags between design and
implementation may invalidate design assumptions. In the MCC-ITP design, untested
assumptions (e.g. the location of unvaccinated children) and incomplete diagnoses (e.g. the
number of functional IBs at the beginning of the MCC-ITP) led to outcomes and impacts
below those planned in project preparation (Lesson two of MCC: "Deepen diagnostic and
feasibility analysis and identify the connection of activities to outputs, outcomes and impacts
during program preparation").
For MCC-ITP, the creation of a national immunization information system was overly
ambitious, given the institutional impediments, delays in official sanctioning, and complexity
of the undertaking, although the consultative process did allow MCC-ITP to change from
the Health Information System (HIS) platform to the SIS in order to achieve pilot testing
(MCC Lesson three: "Be more selective when determining program interventions and
establish a consultative process to tailor focus areas").
26 MCC Threshold Program Lessons Learned, htpllwwwnccgovidocuenispresiacisheet2olooozoasm-hresho
program-lessons-learned.pdf>.
25
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
The MCC-ITP outcome goal of "Integrated Immunization Information System improved
and implemented in the MOH and 1,246 Health Centers"2 was inappropriate for the two-
year (later increased to 30 months) timeframe (MCC Lesson four: "Establish outcome-level
goals that are appropriate for the timeframe").
Buy-ins and ownership should not be assumed. No assurance for activities such as training
for IBs and institutionalization of the VDIM were built into the program design beyond the
efforts to gain ministerial sanction for the IIIS. MCC Lesson six: "Build in sustainability
assurances during program design and early implementation."
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
26
ANNEXES
27
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
ANNEX A THE PROPOSED IMPROVEMENT AND
SUSTAINABILITY ACTION PLANS FOR EACH SELECTED REGION
As indicated in section A of this report, it was agreed with USAID/Peru that the "roadmap"
specified in the section IV.3 of the SOW, would consist of a vision of the immunization programs
for the future and the critical steps needed to achieve the vision. This definition is also understood
to encompass the "critical pathway" mentioned in the same section of the SOW.
VISION
All Peruvians receive all the vaccinations included in the NIS immunization schedule according to
their age. For children, vaccinations are part of integrated child health services. Mothers receive
appropriate counseling and information and their questions are answered. Vaccinations in public
sector facilities are correctly noted in the child health card and on MOH forms and vaccination data
from public and private facilities are correctly entered into national information systems which then
provide timely reports to health staff for monitoring and analysis.
Regional action plans, including:
A critical pathway for plan implementation
Draft budget and financial plan
Draft regulatory framework
Timeline
Specific responsibilities
A communication plan
A mechanism to monitor and evaluate its implementation at the regional and local levels
The Assessment Team facilitated SWOT analyses with regional and network staff in each visited
region. On November 8, 2011, the Team gathered representatives from central and regional levels to
discuss the outcome of the regional SWOT analyses and develop regional critical paths to achieve
the 95% coverage goal in 2012. This meeting had the goal of achieving consensus on critical
activities and the required support from national levels to achieve 95% coverage rates. This meeting
was designed to be part of the ongoing annual planning process of the NIS and will be followed by
macro-regional meetings over the following weeks leading to a national planning meeting
December 1418.
1. The critical pathway identified for each region was different based on their unique needs in
the course of the decentralization process in progress. However, common steps were
identified to strengthen the management of the NIS and RIS.
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
28
Common critical pathway steps:
Retain, recruit, train, and evaluate the performance of immunization staff.
Recognition of good performance needs to be abundant and frequent.
Define a methodology to determine coverage denominators to manage health facility
activities efficiently
Improve information system to gather and monitor numerator data for local facility
management and for national oversight. The information system needs to be
nominal and capture other providers besides public health sector facilities such as
pharmacies, private clinics, armed forces and non-governmenta organizations
(NGOs).
Coordination of all stakeholders at the district and regional levels. This is a new
activity for health staff that is not used to working with the local mayors and will
require training and sharing of good practices.
Training and support to improve the budgeting by results process by each microrred,
and monitoring of budget execution.
Coordinated promotion and communication activities for better informed demand
of regular and timely immunization services. (When will Peru be able to decide to
reduce need for costly campaigns in the future?)
-
Create cold chain preventive maintenance plans and prioritize equipment
replacement
2.
Draft budget and financial plan. The budget and financial needs are included in next year's
budget. There may be need from technical assistance to solve selected bottlenecks such as
planning and implementation of an integrating communication activities, integrated facility
operations and decentralized information management.
3.
Draft regulatory framework. Peru has a very good regulatory framework that is in the
process of being adapted to a decentralized and integrated delivery system. New norms will
be
required to empower regional levels to make informed decisions and respond to local
needs, including:
Norm to create and use local population census to calculate coverage
Procedure to distribute INEI regional populations down to district and province
Norm for preventive cold chain maintenance
- Norm to integrate child services of the Family Health Model in facilities
Standards for human resource management: contracting and remuneration
Procedures for operation of the "parallel system" for information
- Norm for vaccination reporting from the private sector
-
Define mechanisms for local government funding via SNIP and Municipal
Incentives
Procedures to identify, capture and share best practices
29
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
4.
Timeline. All of the activities planned will be implemented in 2012.
5. Specific responsibilities. The specific responsibilities of the national and decentralized
regional levels are clearly defined in the accompanying Critical Steps tables. The national
level sets the policy, i.e. the "'what" to do. The Regional levels decide how to do, i.e. the best
way to deliver this based on their current situation and needs. The technical assistance role
of the central level needs to shift from a prescriptive role to a coaching and facilitating role
to help the regional level figure out the best course of action.
6. A communication plan (see section 2 of this Annex A)
7. A mechanism to monitor and evaluate its implementation at the regional and local levels.
The "parallel system" can become the source of monitoring and evaluation information to
be exported to the HIS. The NIS should help define a small number of indicators to
monitor the quality of care and performance of the health facilities.
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
30
Planes de Mejoramiento y Sostenibilidad Regionales
En este anexo se presentan los resultados de los analisis FODA en las regiones y del consenso
FODA a nivel nacional. Asimismo se presentan los pasos criticos definidos por cada region y sus
planes para implementarlos en 2012.
De los planes regionales se desprenden las siguientes recomendaciones:
1.
El plan de la ESNI debe reafirmar el rol normador y de asistencia tecnica del MOH a las
regiones y de las regiones a las redes y microrredes. Las RISs tienen diferentes niveles de
necesidades tecnicas para hacer cumplir las normas. Se necesitan normas e indicadores de
gestion de la estrategia y un plan para su implementacion y monitoreo.
2.
Las funciones centrales de asistencia tecnica, informacion y monitoreo deben apoyar la
gestion regional. Las capacidades de planificacion varian entre las regiones lo cual impide un
planificacion clara y orientada a los resultados.
3.
Se hizo evidente la necesidad de integracion al nivel operativo de las diversas estrategias, asi
como la definicion operativa del modelo integrado de asistencia. Los establecimientos
visitados no cuentan con manuales operativos que describan el funcionamiento de los
establecimientos: descripcion de funciones, procesos y actividades asistenciales, asi como
practicas de auto-evaluacion de la calidad de atencion.
4. Existen numerosas experiencias buenas y efectivas en las REDESS y micorredes por lo que
se debe facilitar y promover el proceso de intercambio de experiencias y buenas practicas
entre las RISs y entre redes. Esta informacion serviria para desarrollar planes que respondan
a las FODA locales y resolver cuellos de botellas.
5.
Direccion de Estadistica e Informatica debe prepara norma para el ajuste de poblacion para
la gestion de cada establecimiento. La falta de un denominador de poblacion real, no basado
en proyecciones impide una planificacion realista, una buena gestion y el monitoreo efectivo
del desempeno.
31
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
CONTEXTO: FODA NACIONAL
FORTALEZAS
OPORTUNIDADES
1.
Estrategia fuerte y bien organizada
I. Descentralizacion
2.
Esquema de vacunacion ejemplar
2.
Recursos de capacitacion disponibles
3.
Fuerte compromiso politico y financiero (PpR)
3.
Computadoras disponibles
4. Cadena de frio y capacidad de almacenamiento en mejoramiento
4.
Materiales de comunicacion y promocion disponibles
5.
Compromiso politico a nivel MOH naciona
5.
DNI
6.
Personal profesional tecnico y comprometido
6.
PpR
7.
Existe demanda de vacunas
7.
Radio y television
8.
Cooperacion internaciona incluyendo los insumos del MCC-ITP
8.
Lazos con instituciones y sociedad civil
9.
Trabajo integral
9.
Descentralizacion presupuesta y de funciones
10. Desarrollo de capacidades de gestion en manejo de proyectos para el mejoramiento de la cadena de frio
10. Mesas de concertacion en favor de la infancia
II. Disponibilidad de insumos
12. Economias de escala y adquisicion de biologicos mediante Fondo Rotatorio de OPS
13. Proceso de monitoreo, supervision, y asistencia tecnica constante a las regiones
14. Instrumentos para evaluar los indicadores son socializados en todas las regiones y son de uso permanente pare
desarrollar capacidades de gestion
DEBILIDADES
AMENAZAS
I.
Transferencia de personal capacitado
I.
Demanda limitada
2. Formateria
2.
Alto grado de recambio de autoridades
3.
Dificultades en estimacion de indicadores de cobertura
3.
30% no alcanzado, apoyo de otros sectores no-MOH no
4.
Definicion del doble ro de MOH
articulado
5.
Necesidad de capacitacion continua a nivel operativo
4. Gobierno locales
6.
Implementacion incompleta de PpR a nivel de todas las UE
5.
Rotacion de Personal
7.
Sobremeta y submeta de coberturas
6.
Sobre y subestimacion censal pare la gestion de los EE.SS.
8.
Poca difusion del impacto de la estrategia de inmunizaciones
7.
Procesos descentralizados no han sido normados todavia
9.
Corresponsabilidad y compromiso de las autoridades
8. Metodologia de distribucion de la poblacion por edad y sexo en
10. Articulacion para el sostenimiento de los avances del proyecto MCC-ITP
los EE. SS. no se ha definido.
II. Poco tiempo asignado a la educacion de paciente
9.
Necesidad de mecanismos y procesos de monitoreo que
12. Uso y manejo de indicadores de cobertura y desercion
evidencien y reconozcan el cumplimiento
13.
Incompleto ciclo de gestion de la informacion para la gestion y toma de decisiones: Captacion, procesamiento y
10. Formacion universitaria con escaza salud colectiva (comunitaria)
presentacion del dato, Analisis, Retroalimentacion, toma de Decisiones e Ejecucion de cambios
II. Temor de los padres a la vacunacion simultanea de varias
14. Avance lento del sistema informatico integrado de inmunizaciones para la captacion y procesamiento de
vacunas
informacion
12. Gobiernos regionales retrasados en la transferencia presupuestal
15. Avance lento del sistema de informacion geografica.
16. Insuficiente personal capacitado
17. Falta de incentivos laborales
18. Capacidad limitada de laboratorios para investigacion de casos de inmunoprevenibles
19. Poca capacidad para replicar entrenamientos
20. Equipos administrativos no priorizan la ejecucion presupuestal
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
32
AMAZONAS
ANALISIS FODA
FORTALEZAS
OPORTUNIDADES
1. EI personal son enfermera(o)s profesionales, capaces y dedicados comprometidos a la
I. En MEF hay buena disposicion para adoptar las poblaciones de padrones locales.
vacunacion.
2.
Utilizar los equipos de computacion y conectarlos al Internet
2.
Las normas muy completas son aplicadas por el personal.
3.
PAN, PPR y SIS priorizan las inmunizaciones
3. Amazonas instalo su camara fria en Octubre de 2010.
4.
Colaboracion con las instituciones de Formacion Locales
4. Muchos de las establecimientos tienen refrigeradora y congelador funcionando y la
5. Fomentar capacitaciones avanzadas para incrementar competencias y estimular al
mayoria tiene vacunas suficentes. Usan data loggers
personal.
5.
Hay Planes Anuales (POI, Plan Tactico) Buenas practicas de vacunacion
6.
Estimular al personal a crear, analizar y promover soluciones creativas, Ej. Software de
6. Los reportes de informacion sobre coberturas existen y estan actualizados.
seguimiento a ninos.
7.
Conseguir mas recursos formar una unidad para hacer proyectos/propuestas
seguimiento
DEBILIDADES
AMENAZAS
I.
Capacidad gerencial no parece profunda en las redes y microrredes.
I. La migracion y otros movimientos de la poblacion dificultan la vacunacion completa de
2.
EI estimulo mediante la supervision es limitado y el personal se siente aislado en sus
los ninos.
esfuerzos.
2. EI tiempo de las enfermeras utilizado en papeleria se puede utilizar en supervision y
3.
Demasiado tiempo en llenado de los registros diferentes en los EESS.
apoyo.
4.
La cadena de frio no tiene un plan de mantenimiento preventivo y de renovacion.
3.
La movilidad del personal de salud afecta la calidad de servicios y relaciones con la
5. Los IB se redujeron de I a 5 y algunos estan trabajando en el puestos fijos
poblacion.
6.
Comunicacion continua por radio y television limitada para estimular la populacion de
4.
Hay grupos activistas en contra de las vacunas, que necesitan manejo especializado
buscar las vacunas.
7.
Utilizacion limitada de computadoras y PDAs.
8.
Enlaces interinstitucionales debiles.
33
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
Pasos Criticos: Amazonas
Implementar el SIII a nivel de todos los EE.SS del ambito regional
Desarrollar programas educativo comunicacionales con enfoque intercultura para reducir las barreras de rechazo a las inmunizaciones, en
poblacion urbana y rural.
Fortalecer competencias en los profesionales de enfermeria involucrados en las actividades de la ESI (capacitaciones, diplomados en Gerencia de
inmunizaciones, abogacia, liderazgo y PIP)
Desarrollar politicas regionales en gestion de recursos humanos para el sector, que garanticen su permanencia en los EE.SS.
Involucramiento del personal de salud en la ejecucion de los presupuestos por incentivos municipales, para garantizar el buen uso de los mismos.
Las ONG, dentro de su quehacer, deben verificar que las inmunizaciones se aplican en los ninos.
AMAZONAS
PARTICIPANTES: ESTHER, JUAN, SOLEDAD, SARA Y LIZ
ACTIVIDADES
RESPONSABLE
INDICADOR
NECESIDADES
Implementar el SIlI en todos los establecimientos
ODSIS
Capacitacion de digitadores
Apoyo de la Direccion tecnica nacional
Concordancia de la informacion: SIS,
HIS y # de dosis
Diseno e implementacion de un programa educativo
Promocion de salud y
43 kits de promocion en las redes y
Debe incluirse en el PpR de 2012
que utilice las herramientas de maletin de comunicacion
redes
programa en implementacion
Fortalecer competencias
DIRESA
Convenio IRESA-Universidades
Incluir en PpR, imprimir modulos y
Capacitacion con RIS
financiar los gastos de los participantes
Politicas de gestion de RR.HH.
Gobierno Regional-
Nivelacion de remuneraciones
Asistencia del nivel nacional
DIRESA
Involucrar el personal con el programa de incentivos
DIRESA, DISA y
Numero de municipios con PIM
Plan regiona de trabajo integrado con
municipales
Municipios
programado en inmunizaciones
municipios distritales
ONG verifica inmunizaciones
DIRESA
Concordancia del numero de dosis y
Listado de ninos atendidos por ONG
tipo de vacuna con ninos atendidos por
en pilotos y verificar
la ONG
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
34
APURIMAC
ANALISIS FODA
FORTALEZAS
OPORTUNIDADES
I.
Hay stock suficiente en los establecimientos y el stock de la DIRESA esta
I.
En MEF hay buena disposicion para adoptar las poblaciones de padrones locales.
accesible.
2. Hay recursos en los presupuestos municipales que pueden ser convocados para las
2.
EI cuidado clinico, consejeria y referencia se hace muy bien y de acuerdo a las
ESI.
normas de MOH.
3.
EI SIS/AUS paga por los servicios incentivar produccion y reportes, transparentar
3.
La microrred no solo da servicios pero supervisa, da apoyo, y monitorea los
valores hacia micro-redes.
establecimientos en su micro red.
4. EI SIS/AUS produce informacion valiosa de inmunizaciones y CRED.
4.
EI personal recupen ninos con visitas a casas, spots por radio, colaboracion con
5.
Una relacion entre la DIRESA y las escuelas de enfermeria puede hacer la educacion
obstetrices.
pre-servicio mas apropiada para las necesidades del sector.
5.
En muchos comunidades, el personal conoce a todas las familias, y saben
6.
EI reconocimiento por DIRESA y autoridades al personal puede realzar la
quienes y cuando tienen que vacunarse.
importancia de su trabajo. EI reconocimiento debe ser por merito.
6. Hay monitoreo la cadena de frio constantemente, moviendo vacunas segun el
plan de contingencia.
DEBILIDADES
AMENAZAS
I.
Poblacion asignada esta sobrestimada (denominador). Diferentes fechas de
I.
Las municipalidades se benefician de una poblacion sobrestimada.
corte para la recoleccion de informacion.
2.
La formacion de nuevos profesionales no responde a las necesidades de sector.
2.
Los sistemas son de recoleccion de datos y no producen informacion util
para la gerencia O los establecimientos. Muchos formatos para cada servicio.
3. La camara fria todavia no funciona. EI equipo de la cadena de frio a nivel de
establecimientos no tiene mantenimiento preventivo y un plan de renovacion
de equipos.
4.
Cambios de personal capacitado y experimentado debilitan fuertemente los
sistemas de informacion. EI recambio afecta a la confianza de la comunidad.
5.
Capacitacion no se replica en forma sistematica a nivel operativo.
6.
La proporcion del personal contratado es alta y los contractos son cortos, con
grandes diferencias en la remuneracion. Falta reconocimiento por logros y
desempeno.
7.
La Caja de Herramientas para promocion y comunicacion tiene uso limitado
35
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
Pasos Criticos: Apurimac
Sistemas de Informacion
-
Plan de mantenimiento a equipos y software
Capacitacion al personal de informacion y prestadores
-
Minimizar rotacion del personal capacitado
Fortalecer capacidad de analisis del personal de microrred, socializar y tomar decisiones
Plan de recopilacion, registro, analisis y almacenamiento de datos, difusion de informacion y toma de decisiones.
Conexion a Internet en todos los puntos de digitacion.
Unificar sistemas y registros - exportacion del SIS al HIS (RM614), ensayar una tarjeta DNI con banda magnetica para ingreso a todo
sistema de servicio social publico.
Cadena de Frio
Arreglar con el contratista de la camara de frio en 30 dias
-
Plan de mantenimiento preventivo y reposicion.
Priorizar equipamiento con cadena de frio y grupos electrogenos en distritos de acuerdo a la realidad.
-
Incluir financiamiento para cadena de frio en PPR.
Servicios
- Mejorar asignacion presupuestal. MINSA/Calidad que gestione con sectoristas de salud en MEF para financiar clima organizaciona en
PPR.
Equilibrar escalas de remuneracion.
-
Mejorar eficiencia, eficacia y clima organizacional (comunicacion interna para socializar esfuerzos de la DIRESA) trabajo en equipo.
Otros
Estabilizar criterios informaticos y programaticos en SIGA PPR
Fortalecer el sistema de referencia y contrarreferencia
Registrar vacunados con DNI a nivel nacional.
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
36
APURIMAC
PARTICIPANTES: LIC. TEOFILIO CACERES, DR. CARLOS ALFREDO VILLANUEVA LUNA, DR. JORGE UCHUYA. DR. FREDY PAJUELO, Y LIC.
ACTIVIDADES
RESPONSABLE
INDICADOR
NECESIDADES
Sistema Cadena de Frio
Desarrollar Plan de mantenimiento preventivo y reemplazo-Cadena De
ESRI y DIRESA
Criterios para re-emplazamiento
PpR financiamiento en 2012
Frio.
aprobado por iDARES?
Acceso a los fundos de municipios
Iniciar compra de neveras segun las prioridades
# de neveras identificada para
PpR financiamiento en 2012
reemplazar, usando los criterio.
Acceso a los fundos de municipios
Sistema Recursos Humanos
Desarrollar estudio de RH y Plan de reestructurar RH para estabilidad,
RH, ESRI, Gobierno
Asignaciones duran uno ano por lo
Asistencia tecnica experto RG,
salarios, beneficios, incentivos
Regional
menus
Incremento presupuesto PpR 2012
Estabilizar criterios informaticos y programaticos en SIGA PPR
i??
i??
i??
Sistema de Informacion
Fortalecer la implementacion del SIII a nivel Regional
Comite tecnico
Concordancia de la informacion: SIS,
Asistencia tecnica del nivel
implementador de SIlI
Informe analitico # de dosis
Nacional
Formar grupo de trabajo con estadistica, ESRI, SiS y epidemiologia
Estadistica, SIS.ESRI
Grupo de trabajo formado
Plan Regiona
Hacer estudioldefinicion necesidades de sistema de informacion
ESRI, SIS y
Sistema nominal utilizado como
Apoyo-SIS regional
Epidemiologia
norma aprobada
Intercambio con Macroregion
ESRI, PCM
Desarrollar modulos de analisis de la informacion
Estadisticas,
Asistencia SIS y ESRI
epidemiologia ESRI, SIS
Capacitacion al personal- recopilacion y registro de datos
ESRI, SIS regional
Asistencia SIS
Prestar apoyo tecnico a las microrredes y establecimientos de salud
ESRI
Incremento de % de registro
Incluir fondos en PpR 2012
completada correctamente
Capacitacion del personal nuevo en la recopilacion y registro de datos
SIS, ESRI
No de personas capacitados
Plan Regional de capacitacion
Fortalecer capacidades para el procesamiento de los datos brutos (Base
SIS. ESRI, Epidemiologia
No de personas capacitadas en
Asistencia tecnica del nivel
de datos SIS)
procesamiento de datos
Nacional
37
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
CUSCO
ANALISIS FODA
FORTALEZAS
OPORTUNIDADES
I. Personal capacitado
1.
Implementacion de un sistema de informacion integral
2.
Camaras frias y data loggers
2.
Aparicion de nuevas vacunas
3.
Calidad del dato
3.
Intensificar el avance del programa Identidad
4.
Abastecimiento oportuno de insumos y materiales
4.
Incluir ESNI dentro del PAN
5.
Sostenimiento de coberturas de vacunacion.
5.
Programa de Incentivos Municipales
6.
Asistencia Tecnica para el aprovechamiento
7.
de las oportunidades (Ej. PpR)
DEBILIDADES
AMENAZAS
I.
Sinceramiento de la informacion
I.
Poblacion migrante
2.
Retraso en la informacion
2. Disposicion final de cajas seguras
3.
Ausencia del registro nominal del nino
(Requiere apoyo de los municipios)
4.
Alta poblacion migrante
3.
Sobrecarga y multiplicidad de labores para el personal.
5.
Exceso de formatos
4.
Exceso de formatos
6.
Disposicion de residuos post vacuna
5.
Sobreestimacion de la poblacion (INEI)
7.
Ausencia de un sistema de informacion unico
8.
La gestion de las inmunizaciones aun no esta
9.
totalmente descentralizada
10. EI sistema de informacion no esta en red.
Pasos Criticos: Cusco
1. Descentralizacion de los programas (Ej.. CRED si se ha podido hacer adecuacion)
2.
Programacion de metas fisicas que se aproxime mas a lo real.
3. PpR ajustado a las necesidades
4. Retomar el trabajo extramural (la carga administrativa resta tiempo)
5. Difusion sostenida de los beneficios de la vacunacion, especialmente por television nacional.
6. Fortalecer la consejeria en cada contacto con la madre.
7. Implementacion de la codificacion HIS.
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
38
CUSCO
PARTICIPANTES: LIC. TANIA SALDIVAR TAPIA, HILDA PILLCO, LILIAM LIMA
ACTIVIDADES
RESPONSABLE
INDICADOR
NECESIDADES
I.
Programacion de metas fisicas de acuerdo a la
DIRESA, RIS, Redes y
# de redes con padron nominal / total
Apoyo tecnico del INEI, RIS,
poblacion nominal versus HIS
establecimientos
de Redes
colaboracion de USAID y cooperantes,
decisiones politicas, participacion
ciudadana
Fortalecer el trabajo extramural de la RIS para el
DIRESA, RIS, Redes y
Tasa de desercion
seguimiento de los ninos
establecimientos
2. Fortalecer el sistema de comunicacion para la
ESNI, DIRESA
Estudio de impacto de sintonia, tasa
Plan de apoyo de cooperantes
difusion de los beneficios de la vacunacion
de desercion nacional
Apoyo de ESNI
Existe una estrategia nacional para la difusion de vacunas
ESNI, DIRESA
Fortalecer el trabajo comunitario a traves de los
ESNI, DIRESA
COVICOS
Empoderar a los gobiernos locales para apoyar la RIS
ESNI, DIRESA
3. Fortalecer las capacidades de los recursos
ESNI, DIRESA
# de personal capacitado/ total de
Elaborar plan de capacitacion
humanos a nivel operativo mediante la
personal
elaboracion de planes descentralizados de
# de personal certificado/ total de
recursos humanos
personal capacitado
Plan de gestion de recursos humanos
ESNI, DIRESA
39
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
PUNO
ANALISIS FODA
FORTALEZAS
OPORTUNIDADES
I.
Trabajo en equipo RIS-SIS-DIREMID-Estadistic
I.
Coordinacion con Programa Familia Saludable
2.
Libro de Nacimientos
Fortalecer la programacion en PpR 2012
3.
Seguimiento oportuno para CRED y Vacunas
En los criterios de Familia Saludable, deberia estar que todos los miembros de la
4. EI personal se capacita permanentemente para la Estrategia
familia esten vacunados, segun edad
Convenio con Educacion para que el nino tenga vacunas completas al
matricularse, segun edades
Incrementar el personal O las horas disponibles para Familia Saludable
Propiciar el fortalecimiento del Primer Nivel de Atencion
2.
Reconocer el esfuerzo del personal
3. Concientizar el personal de salud que vacunan a sus ninos
DEBILIDADES
AMENAZAS
I. Necesidad de personal
I. Poblacion sobre-estimada
Contrataciones (preferente, renovacion) para enero 2012
2.
Demanda informada
Evaluacion del personal: Diciembre 201
3.
Contra-campana politica desde el nivel central
Programacion de necesidades: Noviembre 2011
Capacitacion
Coordinacion con Colegios para que la capacitacion )Ej. Modulo) sean validos
para recertificacion
Convenio con Universidades para que institucionalicen y den validez a la
capacitacion, O la incorporen en sus programas de pregrado
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
40
Pasos Criticos: Puno
1.
Adecuada programacion y monitoreo del PpR
2. Compromiso politico de las autoridades e involucramiento de las mamas.
3.
Recursos Humanos (Contratos, etc.)
4.
Reconocimiento de la poblacion nominal.
5.
Garantizar la dotacion oportuna de biologicos.
6. Garantizar la cadena de frio.
7.
Capacitacion continua
Indicadores
1. Coberturas
2. Numero de personal
3. Rendimiento del personal / Productividad
4. Porcentaje de ejecucion segun lo programado
5. Concordancia entre utilizacion de biologicos y numero de vacunados.
6. Concordancia entre recursos presupuestados y ninos vacunados (Costo por nino protegido).
41
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
PUNO
PARTICIPANTES: LIC. HONORATA ORTEGA B, LIC. ALICIA QUISPE QUISPE, LIC INGRID ROJAS CASTRO, MARIA DICONA
ACTIVIDADES
RESPONSABLE
INDICADOR
NECESIDADES
Elaborar cuadro de necesidades de cada
Jefes de EE.SS y la
Numero de EE.SS que cuentan con
Realizar capacitaciones y reuniones
establecimiento para que sus PpR incluyan todos los
coordinadora de
cuadro de necesidades/ total de
tecnicas pare elaborar el formato y los
componentes de la RIS
inmunizaciones
EE.SS
instructivos para elaborar el cuadro.
Abogacia con participantes de PROMS y las
PROMS, ESRP, RIS
Renovacion del contrato,
Reuniones de coordinacion internas
autoridades regionales y de RED de salud:
aprobacion de PIP menor
previas
compromiso politico
Ampliacion de plazas vacantes para enfermeras,
Director general, RIS,
Mantener 17| enfermeras y agregar
Tener un plan de necesidades de personal
tecnicos de enfermeria y digitadores
Directores de REDES
50% mas y digitadores para cada
por REDESS y EE.SS
Establecimiento
Evaluacion del desempeno del personal a fin de
RIS y Director de
% de profesionales aprobados
Elaborar instrumentos de evaluacion y
renovar sus contratos e identificar necesidades de
capacitacion
total de personal evaluado
auto-evaluacion, listados de chequeo e
capacitacion
indicadores de desempeno
Formar convenios con universidades para que su
Nivel de Asistencia
Numero y % de convenios firmados
Reunion de Directores generales para
formacion responda a las necesidades y
tecnica y RIS
coordinacion a traves del C.R.D. S.
normatividad del MOH urgente
Elaborar un instrumento O software para evaluar el
ESNI
Instrumento elaborado y usado por
Reunion nacional de programacion y
trabajo diario, y produccion por PpR
la RIS
evaluacion
Elaborar plan de mantenimiento y renovacion de la
Direccion General, RIS
Plan elaborado y el 20% de los
Inventario actualizado cada ano y analisis
cadena de frio, 20% cada ano durante 5 anos por
equipos renovados cada ano
de prioridades
orden de prioridades
Capacitacion y evaluacion trimestral con temas
ESNI, Direccion regional,
Nivel de desempeno de personal en
Realizar supervisiones de acuerdo al
transcendentales como uso de data logggers, vacuna
RIS
las supervisiones
formato de evaluacion
segura
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
42
Communication Plan in support of the Regional Action and Sustainability Plans
A communication plan will be developed in each region by a Team of ESRI. A regional Team
comprised of ESRI, Communications, Promotion, Planning divisions and others will first clarify the
objectives of the Communications Plan (CP) its audiences, what messages/support is intended and
the methods and resources available.
The purpose of the CP will be to assure support for the goals, activities and progress of the Regional
Action Plans. As a first step the Team will assess the resources needed. They will identify the staff
capacity, time available, the potential assignments, the needed budget, the technologies to be used,
and the major activities needed. The Team will also identify technical assistance support needed and
identify potential sources (Communications Office of MINSA, NGOs specializing in
communications, local university communications experts) who can provide technical guidance
to
formulate the CP, the strategy and message development.
A second step will be a clear identification of the audience/s to be reached with messages. For the
four regions' Action Plans, the core/first audience will be the "internal" audience of including ESRI,
DIRIMED, DIRESA, and the immunization staff in establishments, AISPED Teams and others
who need to receive the Communication Plan's message of the Region's mission, critical steps and
the Action Plan to increase immunization coverage The second audience is the regional and local
municipal officials who will receive CP messages to orient and motivate them to support
immunizations/Action Plans. A third major audience is the community leaders, teachers, families
and others who influence mothers' decisions about immunizations. These local actors will receive
messages to inform and motivate them to actively promote immunizations, counteract negative
beliefs and behaviors, and motivate their communities to actively seek vaccinations and actively
cooperate with immunization campaign and barridas. The final and most crucial audience is the
mother/parent; the one/s most directly involved in assuring that their children receive all
vaccinations according to the schedule.
The C-Team will conduct a rapid scan of the needs and resources available. Information about the
audiences will be assembled from the MCC-ITP KAP study, other research, interviews with
anthropology, sociology and public health experts and immunization services coordinators and
managers. A series of key informant interviews and focus groups will be done (with modest amounts
of
technical assistance) to augment the evidence base for the development of messages of
knowledge, attitudes, beliefs, barriers, etc. in each audience that affects immunizations.
With this information, a clear message will be developed to inform, motivate, and promote actions
to be taken with tailoring to each of the key audiences. Although the message is tailored, the clear,
consistent content of the message will be presented across all audiences and will be focused
promoting actions to achieve the result. For example, the messages to regional and municipal
officials and media will inform and motivate them, encourage their support to routine vaccinations
at health establishments and during campaigns and mop-ups and suggest actions they can take as
officials and media persons to motivate communities, and provide logistics, publicity and other
support to vaccination activities.
The Team will work with local communications experts to develop messages and/or adapt ITP
Communications toolbox materials for posters, and Mother's histories, flipcharts, brochures,
workbooks as well as radio and TV spots. Games for school children with immunization related
43
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
messages will also be developed to engage them in carrying messages home to their families. Staff
will be encouraged use the tools to develop/adapt messages and the Team will provide feedback.
To diffuse the messages by mass media, a survey of media outlets will be done, considering their
capacity to broadcast to the priority audiences in the timeslots, language and with the "appeal
needed. The Team will orient and encourage media to broadcast messages, conduct on air
interviews, act as public advocates and otherwise use their media to inform and motivate the public.
Early in the CP process, the Team will identify technologies that will be used to support diffusion of
messages. For example, to deliver messages and otherwise motivate facility staff, frequent Internet
messaging (e.g. Facebook) will encourage staff to actively expand vaccination activities. Likewise
posting the progress of the Action Plans activities on website and actively encouraging staff to visit
these web sites will greatly increase the diffusion of information across regions, allowing staff to
learn from other regions and create competition. The Team can encourage posting of pictures of
immunization activities, graphs of coverage, and can encourage widespread posting of messages.
The Team will meet regularly to monitor progress and rapidly reprogram and adapt as needed, based
on their observations of the activities, and feedback they actively seek from staff, community leaders
and other audiences.
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
44
ANNEX B - STATEMENT OF WORK (SOW) FOR THE
ASSESSMENT, INCLUDING MODIFICATIONS TO THE SOW
Contract No. RAN-I-00-09-00019
TO No. AID-527-TO-11-00001
Social Impact, Inc.
Page No. 4 of 31
SECTION C - STATEMENT OF WORK
I. PURPOSE
The Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) Immunizations Threshold Program (ITP) Team
within the Office of Health of USAID/Peru intends to conduct an assessment of selected regional
immunizations programs (hereinafter the "Assessment"). The purpose of the Assessment is to
inform USAID/Peru, the MCC, and the Government of Peru on current status of national and sub-
national (regional and local) immunizations programs since the close of the MCC-ITP, to identify
factors that facilitate and/or challenge success of medium-term projects such as the MCC-ITP, and
to provide actionable recommendations to increase sustainability of MCC-ITP achievements and
advances in immunizations. Specific objectives of the Assessment are to:
Determine the current functionality of these immunizations systems at national and
subnational (regional and local) levels, including those national systems and processes that
affect sub-national program performance or operations;
Assess the implementation of immunization program plans since the close of the MCCITP;
Identify factors that facilitate and factors that challenge sustained success of interventions
such as the MCC-ITP; and
Recommend critical pathways for improvement and sustainability at the subnational levels.
The period of performance is estimated at no more than seventeen weeks, from August 31, 2011 to
December 28, 2011.
II. SCOPE
The Assessment will cover from the close of the MCC-ITP in selected regions on or before
February, 2011 through the current date
III. BACKGROUND
From October 2008 through February 2011, USAID/Per contracted with Abt Associates, Inc. to
implement the MCC-ITP to support the Peruvian immunizations system and increase immunization
rates. One of the main objectives of the MCC-ITP was to increase the vaccine coverage for measles
and the third dose of diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus (DPT3) above the safety threshold of 95% in eight
targeted regions: Amazonas, Apurimac, Ayacucho, Cusco, Huancavelica, Huanuco, Ica and Puno.
During implementation the MCC-ITP faced numerous challenges, many related to the changes in
roles and responsibilities caused by decentralization of Peru's health system At the beginning of the
45
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
program, the MCC-ITP's initial assessment of the targeted regions highlighted a weakening of
resources (such as human resources, medical equipment, vaccine storage equipment, supplies, and
training) for health care facilities and questioned the accuracy of health information available. When
MCC approved the Threshold Program for Peru in 2008, systems of the Ministry of Health (MOH)
such as logistics and information were centrally managed and operated The subsequent
decentralization of Peru's public health sector rapidly transferred many health system functions from
the central MOH to regional governments. The regions had varying levels of management capacity
to implement these new functions, and not all the aspects of the system were ready to function in a
decentralized manner. For example, many regional governments in the regions targeted by the
MCC-ITP had neither the information nor the capacity necessary to operate, plan, budget, and
request resources to finance the human resources, vaccine supplies, and management of
immunizations programs. Regional abilities to increase immunizations coverage rates were also
affected by additional challenges, such as a dramatic expansion of Peru's national vaccination
schedule, changes in the official population count within regions, and MOH difficulties with timely
procurement of vaccines and equipment.
To overcome these challenges and achieve MCC-ITP goals, the program worked with the MOH and
regional governments to build capacity and competency in health personnel strengthen itinerant
brigades in selected regions, i.e., roving medical Teams that bring basic health services, including
vaccinations, to dispersed populations; analyze and improve vaccine logistics; develop regional
immunizations improvement plans; and implement an integrated immunizations information system,
at national and subnational levels, that relies on identification of patients by name (and therefore
does not require a national identity card, which many rural Peruvians do not have). Across all 26
regions of Peru, the MCC-ITP donated 1,250 computers and provided
technical assistance to improve and implement the integrated immunizations information system.
(Please see ttp://inmunizaciones.programaumbral.pe/ for more information on MCCITP
deliverables.)
In the areas of behavior change, communication and advocacy, the MCC-ITP worked with regions
to generate demand for vaccinations within target populations and to build capacity of local
healthcare providers to communicate within a gender sensitive and culturally respectful manner. In
the seventeen regions of Peru using itinerant brigades to reach rural populations and the MCC-ITP
provided equipment and training for the brigades; technical assistance in design and implementation
of communications strategies and regional immunizations plans; and technical assistance in the
planning, budgeting, and financing of immunizations operations.
In June 2010, USAID/Peru awarded CAMRIS International a contract for an interim assessment of
the MCC-ITP. A copy of that final interim assessment is available for review through the
Development Experience Clearinghouse (www.dec.gov) as Report Number 10-01-1018. The interim
assessment concluded that, in general, MCC-ITP activities were being successfully implemented.
After 30 months of operations, the MCC-ITP had made significant contributions to increase
immunizations for measles (as part of the combined vaccine against measles, mumps and rubella,
hereinafter called MMR), diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus (as part of the DPT, HB and Hib
combined vaccine, hereinafter called Pentavalent), as shown by the increase in the administration
of
immunization doses for children under two. The assessment found that the MCC-ITP also had
made important contributions to the advancement of the institutional framework to ensure
sustainability in the immunizations improvement.
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
46
Despite the positive interim assessment findings, official data from Peru's Demographic Health
Survey (DHS) for the eight priority regions during 2008-2010 showed that expected coverage with
DPT and measles did not reach the safety threshold of 95%, (please see table below), and results
were uneven among the targeted regions.
47
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
INMUMIZATIONI COVERAGE IN MCC-TP TARGETED REGIONS 2008-2010
Percentage of children between 18 and 29 months of age that received specified
vaccinations at any time prior to the survey (according to vaccination recond card or as
reported by the child's mother), DHS Peru, 2008, 2009, 2010.
Characteris
DPT 3
Measles
All vaccines
tic
2008
2008
2009
2010
2008
2009
2010
2009
2010
(1)
Residential Anea
Urban
75.
75.7
73.6
80.7
82.5
57.7
53.2
59.3
73.5
6
Rural
77.
77.0
73.9
86.0
85.1
55.7
47.9
57.3
71.6
1
Eight MCC-ITP --
targeted Regions
Amazonas
77.
78
74.3
74.0
79.5
88.4
53.8
59.2
60.5
9
+
Apurimac
74.
80.
85.5
89.6
88.0
96.5
66.3
54.6
84.6
9
7
Ayacucho
66.
79.
84.4
75.3
84.3
88.2
68.4
52.7
62.7
5
5
Ousco
78.
75.
71.1
84.2
77.2
89.8
52.0
46.3
69.3
O
9
Huancawelic
82.
82.
78.5
92.1
89.3
89.2
53.7
69.6
81.5
5
6
Huanuco
79.
82.
82.7
78.6
90.7
844.6
55.5
64.6
59.4
6
+
ica
72.
74.
68.5
73.0
75.7
73.7
50.0
55.7
56.7
3
+4
Puno
70.
68.
77.2
54.9
75.7
78.6
46.3
49.4
47.0
6
6
Additional Regions
Receiving MCC-ITP
Support
Ancash
84.
78.
66.4
73.8
88.9
92.6
46.1
58.4
61.1
2
9
Cajamarca
72.
76.8
74.6
90.1
83
87.9
61.0
45..6
59.1
Junin
71.
78.9
75.3
80.5
g
85.3
55.1
48.3
61.0
1
La Libertad
73.
60..
70.4
75.9
78.0
86.7
54.8
43.8
62.4
22
B
Loreto
66.
74.
84.7
70.5
75..8
81.0
58.0
41.9
53.9
1
1
Madre de
57.
53.
67.7
68.3
69.3
77.9
46.5
31.9
50.1
Dos
0
B
Pasco
70.
78.
62.7
71.2
75.7
84.8
44.3
36.1
59.6
7
San Martin
78.
85.
86.1
78.2
80.2
84.1
69.4
64.7
56.5
5
2
Lcayali
72.
72.
75.5
71.6
75.0
74.2
56.4
56.9
57.1
7
B
National
8.2.
76.
76.2
56.9
72.9
51.4
73.7
83.4
58.6
B
1
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
48
The interim assessment and DHS data also revealed performance differences among MCC targeted
regions, each of which received similar levels of program support. One hypothesis is that these
variances in program success were caused by the discrepancy in readiness and capacity of regional
authorities to assume responsibilities transferred to them under decentralization of the health sector.
Such differences in regional preparedness would affect not only the immunizations program
(Estrategia Nacional de Immunizaciones (ESNI)), but also other vertical national programs (such as
those for tuberculosis and family planning) as they transition through decentralization. It is also
important to examine the effect that decentralization and subsequent transition of
authority/responsibility, as well as changes in national vaccine schedule, had on MCC-ITP
implementation and outcomes.
IV. OBJECTIVES
The Assessment shall accomplish the following objectives:
A. In at least four of the eight regions targeted by the MCC-ITP (no less than two with higher
immunizations coverage rates and two with lower immunization coverage rates), hereinafter the
"Selected Regions," assess the current functioning of the regional immunizations system, including a
review of any national-level support or resources (such as monitoring/supervision, training,
stewardship/guidance, financing, technical support,
equipment, and vaccine supplies) on which the regional program relies. The Assessment shall
ascertain the level of continued implementation of immunization program plans in the Selected
Regions following the completion of the MCC-ITP and identify successes and/or gaps in the
systems;
B. In each of the Selected Regions, perform a SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and
threats) analysis of the immunizations performance in a health network (local-level network of
micro-networks, health facilities and itinerant brigades) with higher immunization coverage rates and
in a health network with lower immunization rates in order to identify factors that facilitate and that
challenge sustained success of medium-term interventions such as the MCC-ITP; and
C. Develop, in consultation with regional authorities and other stakeholders, recommendations for
critical pathways for improvement and sustainability for each assessed health network, and region.
The recommendations shall be designed to serve as roadmaps and be adaptable for developing
improvement plans for other regional and local governments in further strengthening their
immunization programs and ensuring sustainability of MCC-ITP achievements.
The Assessment shall address a number of specific issues of MCC and USAID interest. To ensure
these topics are covered, USAID has developed a series of Assessment Questions (delineated
below) to be answered by the Assessment. The Assessment shall cover issues and questions in the
following three thematic areas:
1) Regional Immunizations Programs. In each Selected Region, the Assessment shall appraise
the region's capacity to deliver and performance in delivery of basic vaccines for children.
a) What were the effects and achievements of the MCC-ITP in the region, including but not
limited to:
Impact of the MCC-ITP in the region;
49
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
Factors that hindered, facilitated, or otherwise influenced the effectiveness of the MCC-
ITP (such as regional readiness to assume responsibilities under decentralization); and
Reasons for difference in immunizations coverage outcomes within and among regions
that received MCC-ITP support.
b)
What is the post MCC-ITP status of development of the regional immunizations program
including but not limited to:
Political priority at the different levels;
Funding mechanisms at the different levels (national, sub-national);
Norms and procedures - implementation, monitoring and improvement;
Human resources - staffing quality and quantity;
Managerial and administrative capacity at national and sub-national level (regional,
provincial, municipal or district) to plan, implement and monitor immunizations;
Information and epidemiologica surveillance - data quality and use;
Degree of protection achieved, the level of risk and epidemic potential;
-
Involvement of national surveillance system for detecting and controlling vaccine-
preventable diseases;
Cold chain functionality - supply quantity and quality;
Biosecurity practices in the handling and disposal of used syringes and vials; and
Achievements in social communication and the degree of user satisfaction - service
quality, quantity, and demand; and
Capacity to adapt to new demands generated by health sector reform, including
decentralization, Universal Health Insurance, integration of immunizations into maternal
and child health programs, and the inclusion of new technologies and vaccines.
c)
How has the regional immunizations program progressed since the close of the MCCITP, in
terms of but not limited to:
Adherence to region-specific recommendations provided by MCC-ITP;
Demonstrated commitment to continued improvement of immunizations program;
Sustainability of results achieved at end of the MCC-ITP; and
-
Extent to which tools produced by the MCC-ITP are being used, and why are or aren't
they being used.
2)
Immunizations Performance in the Health Networks. In each of the Selected Regions,
perform a SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats) analysis of the immunizations
performance in a health network (local-level network of micro-networks, health facilities and
itinerant brigades) with higher immunization coverage rates and in a health network with lower
immunization rates in order to identify factors that facilitate and that challenge sustained success of
medium-term interventions such as the MCC-ITP.
The SWOT shall include analysis of network performance in immunizations, including but not
limited to:
Coverage rate and compliance with vaccination schedules;
Managerial priority given to vaccinations;
Availability of vaccinations and necessary supplies;
Use of norms and procedures for vaccinations;
Human resources;
Information and epidemiological surveillance;
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
50
Involvement of national or regional surveillance system for detecting and controlling
vaccine-preventable diseases;
Cold chain functionality;
Biosecurity practices in the handling and disposal of used syringes and vials;
Achievements in social communication and the degree of user satisfaction; and
Factors (such as geographic, political, economic, social, readiness/capacity to implement
system, and other aspects of decentralization) that facilitated and/or impeded continued
improvements to immunizations program after the close of the MCC-ITP.
3) Improvement and Sustainability Plan. The Assessment shall identify weaknesses and gaps in
the regional immunizations programs and in the functioning of those systems at the health network
level. The Assessment report shall provide recommendations to improve immunizations and ensure
sustainability. These recommendations will be developed in consultation with national, regional, and
local input as appropriate, and will include regional and local action plans for each selected region.
The action plans prepared shall be developed to serve as roadmaps and/o models for other regional
and local governments to use in strengthening their respective immunizations programs. The action
plans shall consider activities that are feasible within the system cost constraints and applicable in
the context of the health sector reform (decentralization and Universal Health Insurance). The
action plans must include:
A critical pathway for plan implementation;
Draft budget and financial plan;
Draft regulatory framework;
Timeline;
Specific responsibilities;
A communication plan; and
A mechanism to monitor and evaluate its implementation at the regional and local levels.
V. METHODOLOGY
The Contractor shall submit to USAID/Per a Technical Proposal including a suggested
methodology, actions, and timeline for completion of the Assessment. The methodology proposed
should comply with USAID Evaluation Policy (http://www.usaid.gov/evaluation/). The Proposal
shall include a case study approach and employ, at a minimum, an analysis of information and data
obtained through document reviews, e.g., MCC-ITP reports, MOH reports, information from the
DHS, and health network and micro network records, direct observation, and interviews with health
stakeholders in the selected regions (USAID, MOH, other donors such as the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF), regional and local governments, the USAID Contractor that
implemented the MCC-ITP (Abt Associates, Inc.), GOP partners, health networks, micro-networks,
health facilities, itinerant brigades, and communities. The proposed methodology shall allow and
seek participation of stakeholders during the assessment process.
To the extent practicable, data collection shall be systematic and findings and conclusions should be
evidenced-based
51
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
The proposed methodology shall allow the Contractor to analyze the functioning of the
immunizations system from the national level down to the health post level, i.e., regional, network,
micro-network, and health facility, and the sustainability of the MCC-ITP assistance in the selected
regions The Contractor shall prepare its proposal on the basis of travel to at least four regions to
perform the Assessment. The regions selected for review will be confirmed by USAID/Peru The
following factors may be taken into consideration when determining field visits: security,
geographical location, immunizations coverage performance, and number of MCC-ITP activities
implemented in the region.
Regarding analysis and comparison of immunization performance in health networks, the Proposal
shall include criteria for selecting which health networks within each selected region to include in the
Assessment. The health networks selected for review will be confirmed by USAID/Peru. The
following factors may be taken into consideration when determining which networks to include in
the Assessment: security, geographical location, immunizations coverage performance, number of
MCC-ITP activities at the network. The networks selected for review should have at least one
itinerant brigade.
The Proposal shall include, in each of the selected regions and health networks, an in-depth analysis
and interviews to identify strengths, weakness, opportunities, and threats. Proposed
recommendations and action plans to remedy the problems identified should be elaborated in a
participatory manner with stakeholders, e.g., regional authorities, health networks decisionmakers,
users, etc.
Documents to be reviewed by the Contractor shall include but are not limited to:
MOH national immunization plans
Regional immunizations plans for the selected regions
MCC-ITP project reports
MCC-ITP special studies, e.g., assessments of the immunization strategy at the regional level,
assessments of the logistic system, immunization system, cost of itinerant brigades
Mid-term assessment of the MCC-ITP
DHS reports
Vaccination reports (MOH, selected regional health office, health network, micro network,
health post)
List of individuals/institutions to be interviewed include but are not limited to:
USAID
Peru's Presidencia del Consejo de Ministros - Threshold Program Executive Directorate
MOH
UNICEF/Peru
Pan American Health Organization
Regional governments in selected regions
Regional Health Offices in selected regions
Heads of selected health networks
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
52
Heads of health micro networks within selected networks
Itinerant brigades from selected health networks
Ministry of Economy and Finance
Other Donors
VI. SCHEDULE
Not
more than seventeen weeks of services will be required to complete the services required under
this Task Order Contract. The Contractor, on the basis of the information provided above, shall
provide a detailed work plan The work plan shall provide details of how all the various tasks and
activities will be undertaken; the starting time and duration of each; location and staff resources for
the duration of the services. The proposed work plan should be consistent with the technical
approach and methodology, demonstrating that the offeror understands the SOW. The work plan
may follow a schedule, included for illustrative purposes only, such as:
Week 1: Team preparation.
Week 2: Review of existing information, studies. Site selection for field visits.
Week 3: Analysis of available data. Prepare data collection instruments.
Week 4: Lima interviews.
Week 5-6-7: Field visits.
Week 8: Data processing.
Week 9: Analyze findings.
Week 10: Debrief to USAID and GOP counterparts.
Week 11: Finalizing regional action plans.
Week 12: Presentation of action plans to regions.
Week 13: Submission of Draft Report.
Week 15: Submission of Final Draft Report and Draft Peer Review Paper.
Week 17: Submission of Final Report and Peer Review paper.
VII. DELIVERABLES AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
The Contractor shall produce the reports generally described in the sections below to the highest
international technical standards, and compliance with USAID requirements The following is the
list of deliverables and reports expected from the Contractor, their contents, and general times of
delivery. The Contractor shall propose a schedule for specific delivery dates in the Work plan.
1) Work plan: During mobilization, having studied the operational budget and logistics, the
Contractor shall produce an updated work plan for review and approval by USAID within
fourteen days from the start of the TO. The work plan shall be consistent with the TO.
The workplan shall detail the execution, supervision, and progress of activities to be
performed under the TO. The Contractor requires prior approval from the Contracting Officer
(CO) to modify the Contract. The Contractor requires prior approval by the COTR to modify or
revise the workplan. The work plan shall include: the Contractor's understanding of the assignment,
the objectives and desired end products; roles and responsibilities; description of the methodologies
and data collection instruments to be used; description of the individual tasks methods, materials,
personnel, procedures and proposed schedules and field visits to carry out the assessment and
53
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
respond to each research question. The Contractor shall not proceed with the assessment prior to
USAID approval of the Assessment work plan
2) Preliminary debriefing: Five days after completing the field visits, the Contractor will present
an outline of preliminary findings and recommendations to the USAID MCC Team. The
USAID MCC Team will provide comments orally, which the Contractor will use to finalize its
draft report.
3) Preliminary report and debriefing: The Contractor will prepare a power point presentation in
Spanish to present first to the USAID/Pe Team and then to MOH key stakeholders, in a
debriefing meeting, the key findings and recommendations from the assessment, including the
draft regional action plans and proposed presentation schedule for the regional plans. All
recommendations should be presented as actionable recommendations and shall identify the
recommended institution and/or office responsible. The Contractor shall collect comments and
recommendations expressed in the debriefing meeting and shall incorporate them in the Draft
Assessment Report.
4) Presentation of regional improvement and sustainability plans: Contractor shall present
proposed regional action plans to improve and sustain basic child immunizations (as described
in section IV. 3) to selected regions.
5) Draft Assessment Report: Contractor shall submit to USAID for review a draft assessment
report in English within 13 weeks from the award date. USAID will provide comments within
one week after receiving Draft Assessment Report.
6) Final Draft Report: Contractor shall submit to USAID for review a Final Draft Assessment
Report in English and Spanish, one week after receiving USAID comments on the Draft
Assessment Report. USAID will provide comments to these reports within one week after
receiving the Final Draft Report.
7)
Draft Peer Review Paper: Contractor shall prepare a paper, in English, on findings that
complies with international standards for submission of a paper for peer review. Contractor will
submit to USAID for review a Draft Peer Review Paper along with Final Draft Assessment
Report. USAID will provide comments to the Draft Peer Review Paper within one week after
receiving the document.
8)
Final Report: The Final Assessment Report shall be submitted at the end of the services, o/a
seventeen weeks after the award date. The Final Assessment Report shall be based on the
information included in the draft Assessment Reports and responses thereto. Sections of the
Final Assessment Report should include:
a)
Executive Summary: two to five page summary of the purpose, background of the project,
main assessment questions, methods, findings, conclusions, recommendations and lessons
learned (if applicable) of the Assessment. This Executive Summary will be used by the
Contractor as the abstract to accompany the Contractor's submission of the Final
Assessment Report to the USAID Development Experience Clearinghouse.
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
54
b) Assessment Report: In no more than 45 pages, the Assessment Report shall present a
thoughtful, well-researched, evidence-based, and well-organized objective report that fulfills
the purposes of the assessment. It shall discuss the major findings and the related issues and
questions identified in Section III. Sections of the body of the Assessment report shall
include:
i) Purpose of the Assessment and assessment questions;
ii) Summary of the methodology applied, data collection methods, and description of the
sites selected.
iii) Evidence/findings of the study concerning the assessment questions;
iv) Briefly stated conclusions drawn from the findings, including lessons learned; and
v) Recommendations based on the assessment's findings and conclusions, presented with
sufficient detail to enable actions to be taken by involved parties.
c)
Annexes: Annexes to the Final Report shall include:
i)
The proposed improvement and sustainability action plan for each Selected Region.
Each regional action plan shall include a brief summary of the findings and conclusions
of the assessment in the region, and the elements described in section IV. 3).
ii)
Statement of Work (SOW) for the Assessment, including modifications to the SOW,
whether in technical requirements, evaluation questions, evaluation Team composition,
methodology or timeline, requires prior approval of the Contracting Officer. The
Contractor shall submit the request to the CO and the COTR for review. The workplan
shall be consistent with the SOW and the COTR may approve revision(s) to the
workplan.
iii)
Methodologica notes. This section shall include all tools used in conducting the
evaluation, e.g., questionnaires, checklists, and discussion guides.
iv) List of documents reviewed.
V) List of people interviewed.
vi) Other relevant information.
9) Final Peer Review Paper: Contractor shall submit to USAID its paper on findings that
complies with international standards for submission for peer review. The Final Peer Review
Paper shall be submitted to USAID with the Final Assessment Report, o/a seventeen weeks
after award date, and be based on information included in the Draft Peer Review Paper and
USAID's comments thereto.
All reports and papers shall be considered draft until they are approved by USAID. The Assessment
Reports shall meet a minimum of the following quality criteria:
Limitations to the assessment shall be disclosed in the report with particular attention to
limitations associated with the evaluation methodology, i.e., selection bias, recall bias,
unobservable differences between comparator groups, etc.
Statement of differences: when applicable, evaluation reports shall include statements
regarding any significant unresolved differences of opinion either of USAID, counterparts,
implementers, and/or members of the evaluation Team.
Assessment reports shall address all evaluation questions included in the SOW.
Findings will assess outcomes and impact on males and females, where applicable
55
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
Assessment findings shall be presented as analyzed facts, evidence, and data, and not based
on anecdotes, hearsay or the compilation of people's opinions. Findings shall be specific,
concise, and supported by strong quantitative or qualitative evidence.
Sources of information shall to be properly identified and listed in an annex.
Recommendations shall be supported by a specific set of findings.
Recommendations shall be action-oriented, practical and specific, with defined responsibility
for the action.
The Final Assessment Report shall be produced in English in an electronic format and in five (5)
print copies bound and one (1) original unbound and produced in Spanish in an electronic format
and two (2) print copies bound and one (1) original unbound. The Final Peer Review Paper shall be
produced in English in five (5) print copies bound and (1) original unbound. All reports and papers
shall be produced in electronic form, eight (8) copies on CD/DVD, written in an application
compatible with MS Windows & MS Office.
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
56
ANNEX C - METHODOLOGICAL NOTES, INCLUDING ALL TOOLS
USED IN CONDUCTING THE EVALUATION QUESTIONNAIRES,
CHECKLISTS, AND DISCUSSION GUIDES
ANNEX C. I - DATA COLLECTION INSTRUMENTS
Regiona Data Collection Checklist
Region:
ACTIVITY
DONE
I.
Conduct initial meeting with President and Gerente de Desarrollo. Write down minutes.
2.
Conduct initial meeting with Regional health Team: DIRESA, RIS, DIREMID, Estadistica, ODSIS, IB,
Epidemiologia, Promotion, Dept. Education, and MEF. Get agreement on Date and time for SWOT
workshop and select networks to be assessed. Invite to accompany. Write down minutes
3.
Show draft plan of activities and complete list, timing and sequence
4.
Ask for 2011 Plan Regional de Inmunizaciones
5.
Get copy of August 2011 HIS report
6.
Get copy of August 2011 Epidemiological report
7.
Conduct individual meetings/interviews and write down minutes
8.
Visit Network I and Post I
9.
Visit Network 2 and Post 2
10.
Interview at least one IB
II.
Book venue and make coffee break arrangement for SWOT workshop
12.
Conduct SWOT work shop
13.
Get blank copy of local "certificado de vacunaciones"
14.
Get copy of latest Supervision report from DIRESA to selected Networks
15.
Keep list of people met with contact information
16.
Agree on who will come to Lima for the November 8th workshop and make arrangements for
transport, per diem and hotel
17.
Keep list of documents collected
57
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
SWOT Attendance sign up
REGION:
FECHA:
NOMBRE
CARGO
TELEFONO
EMAIL
FIRMA
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
58
SOCIAL IMPACT MCC-ITP ASSESSMENT
INTERVIEW AGENDA AND MINUTES
DATE:
Interviewee's Name Ministry of Health Central Office
Interviewer (s):
Email
Phone
QUESTIONS / TOPICS
NOTES
DOCUMENT REF.
What responsibilities does your office have for national level
support of the immunization program, including the following:
Setting, national policy on vaccinations, reviewing or
monitoring its implementation?
Developing long term planning for vaccination program?
Aggregating data (coverage and service delivery data),
analyzing data, providing recommendations based on
data?
Coordinating with international donors on vaccination
programs?
Supporting development of regional action plans (HR,
budgets, etc). ?
Please discuss in more detail how you carry out the following
responsibilities:
Monitoring/supervision
training
stewardshiplguidance
financing
technical support,
equipment, and vaccine supplies
developing information systems
Analyze and improve vaccine logistics
Others
What is the current functioning of the regional immunization
systems? What data do you use to assess the systems
functioning?
How has the MOH sustained the results achieved under the
MCC/ITP?
What have been the lessons learned?
Please describe changes/improvements planned for the
immunization program in the selected regions.
59
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
INTERVIEW AGENDA AND MINUTES (CON'T)
DATE:
Interviewee's Name : Ministry of Health - Central Office
Interviewer (s):
Email :
Phone :
QUESTIONS / TOPICS
NOTES
DOCUMENT REF.
SWOT QUESTIONS
What are the particular strengthens of
your immunization program?
What are the particular weaknesses of
your immunization program?
What opportunities do you see to
improve your program?
What are the major threats to
improving and sustaining your
immunization program?
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
60
SOCIAL IMPACT MCC-ITP ASSESSMENT
INTERVIEW AGENDA AND MINUTES
DATE: SEPTEMBER 13, 201I
Interviewee's Name Representives of President Council,
Interviewer (s):
Intergovernmental Commission of Ministers,anc Office of
Decentralization
Email :
Phone
QUESTIONS / TOPICS
NOTES
DOCUMENT REF.
What repsonsibilties does your office have for
national level support of the immunization
program?
Setting, national policy on vaccinations,
reviewing or monitoring its implementation
Developing long term planning for vaccination
program
Aggregating data (coverage and service
delivery data), analyzing data providing
recommendations based on data
Coordinating with international donors on
vaccination programs
Supporting development of regional action
plans (HR, budgets, etc).
61
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
INTERVIEW GUIDE FOR REGIONAL HEALTH TEAM
1) Cuales considera que son los logros mas importantes del Programa MCC-ITP de Inmunizaciones?
2) Cuales de estos se mantienen hasta la fecha?
3) :Que factores favorecieron estos logros en esta Region?
4) Cual es la cobertura de Inmunizaciones para Pentavalente?
5) Tienen un Comite Tecnico de la RIS?
6) Las diversas Redes tienen diferentes coberturas. A que atribuyen estas variaciones?
7) :Como apoya su gobierno regional (presidente, planeamiento, Ger. Des. Soc.) al programa de
inmunizaciones y como monitorea las coberturas? Con que datos?
8) Como apoyan los lideres comunitarios y las sociedad civil al programa de inmunizaciones y como
monitorea las coberturas?
a)
Desarrollan reuniones de concertacion intrasectorial?
b) Se realizan audiencias publicas?
9)
Tiene la Region un Plan Regional de Inmunizaciones para el 2011?
a) Si no lo tiene, cpor que?
b)
Si lo tiene, tiene resolucion de aprobacion?
c) Favor proporcionar una copia del plan, y de la Resolucion.
10) :Cuando fue la ultima evaluacion del Plan Regional de Inmunizaciones? :Cual fue el resultado de la
evaluacion? (pedir copia del Informe de la evaluacion)
11) Se elaboro un presupuesto PPR para vacunaciones? Cual es su nivel de ejecucion? Que dificultades se
estan presentando?
12) :Como vienen funcionando los reembolsos del SIS para el case de inmunizaciones?
13) Hay municipalidades que han participado del Programa de Incentivos Municipales, en lo referido a
inmunizaciones?
14) Cuando fue la ultima supervision que tuvieron por parte de la ESNI? (pedir una copia del informe)
15) Existen planes anuales de inmunizacion a nivel de redes y municipios para 2011? Tienen aprobacion? Se
estan implementando?
16) Se aplican las normas nacionales de la Estrategia de Salud Nacional Inmunizaciones (ESNI) en cuanto a
calendarios y procedimientos? Se monitorea su aplicacion? Tienen alguna dificultad para la aplicacion de las
normas, en especial para Pentavalente3 y SPR?
17) :Han sufrido desabastecimiento de vacunas durante el 2011, especialmente DPT / SPR, in 2011?
a. Y han tenido algun desabastecimiento de jeringas u otros insumos?
b. Realizan un monitoreo de vacunas y jeringas entregadas a los establecimientos de salud?
18) Estan usando actualmente el SIII?
19) Cual es el ultimo reporte de coberturas de inmunizaciones? Podrian proporcionarnos una copia? Cual es su
cobertura actual de Inmunizaciones como Region? Para Pentavalente? Y para SPR? Tienen alguna red que
reporte menos del 95% O mas del 100% de cobertura? Que medidas han tomado al respecto?
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
62
20) Cuantas computadoras recibieron por parte del Programa MCC-ITP? Se encuentran registradas en el
SIGA? En que se estan usando actualmente?
21) Cuanto personal de la Region participo en la Capacitacion Virtual? Quienes fueron? Recibieron sus
certificados?
22) Tienen el Maletin de Materiales de Comunicacion desarrollado por el Programa MCC-ITP? Como lo
emplean? Han elaborado materiales nuevos basados en la metodologia de MCC-ITP?
23) Tienen un Plan Regional de Comunicacion Social? Es un Plan separado O es parte del Plan Regional de
Inmunizaciones?
24) Se informa a los padres de familia O apoderados acerca de las reacciones post-vacunales?
25) Existe algun movimiento de resistencia activa a la estrategia de inmunizaciones en su region? Explique.
26) :Cuantas IB tienen en su Region? Han aumentado O disminuido en comparacion con el ano pasado?
Estan equipadas de acuerdo a la norma? :Han tenido problemas con el equipamiento? Tienen problemas
para reclutar O mantener el personal? Que apoyo reciben las redes para mantener sus brigadas? Vienen
usando las PDA?
27) El Programa MCC-ITP, en su informe final, efectuo algunas recomendaciones para su region (Ver el
informe final MCC-ITP). Podria comentarnos si se llegaron a aplicar?
28) Podrian comentarnos algunas de las lecciones aprendidas en el proceso de implementar la descentralizacion
en la Region?
ENCUESTA SOBRE LA GESTION DEL PROGRAMA DE INMUNIZACIONES EN
ESTABLECIMIENTOS
REGION
TIPO
Centro de Salud
Puesto de Salud
NOMBRE DE LARED
AREA
Urbana
Rural
NOMBRE DEL
ESTABLECIMIENTO
63
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
DATOS DE LA PERSONA RESPONSABLE DE INMUNIZACIONES EN EL
ESTABLECIMIENTO
Nombre
Capacitado por el Programa
Tiempo en este cargo desde
Telefono ylo Correo electronico para
MCC-ITP
(fecha)
contactarlo si hay necesidad de
Si =
aclaracion
No=2
PREGUNTAS SOBRE EL ESTABLECIMIENTO
RESPUESTA
iTiene energia electrica? Si I,No =2
Numero de horas con energia electrica en un dia normal
iExiste un generador electrico de energia?
Si I,No =2, No se sabe =9
(Ha usado el generador electrico el ultimo trimestre?
Si = No=2; No sabe=3
Si tiene refrigeradora a gas ipuede comprar gas en la localidad?:
Si l; No=2; No sabe=3; No tiene=4
iAccede a telefono si le faltan vacunas O necesita insumos?
En el establecimiento=|;Er un centro comunitario=2; Celular personal=3;
No accede =4; Otro=5 Especificar
iAccede a comunicacion por radio?
En el establecimiento=| En el Municipio=2;
No accede =3 Otro= 4 Especificar
Tiene computadora en el establecimiento para registrar los datos de inmunizaciones?
Si = I No=2
iUsa la computadora para registrar los datos de inmunizaciones?
Si =
No=2 Por que?
iTiene impresora conectada a la computadora con tinta y papel?
Si = I No=2
iAccede al Internet?
Si, en el establecimiento=l; Si, en cabina=2;
Si, en otro lugar=3 (Especificar) No=4
COBERTURA DE VACUNACIONES Y CUMPLIMIENTO DEL ESQUEMA DE
VACUNACIONES
Puede mostrar el plan regional de la estrategia de inmunizaciones?
Si =1 Obtenga una copia
No=2
Puede mostrar el plan operativo de establecimiento?
Si =1 Obtenga una copia
No=2
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
64
El plan tiene una seccion para inmunizaciones?
Si=1 No=2
:Cual ha sido la poblacion oficial para vacunar en el 2011 por grupo de edad? (La poblacion oficial es aquella que
fue proporcionada por la oficina de estadistica de la DIRESA para el ano 2011, se refiere al numero de
ninos/personas por cohorte de edad)
ANO
<DE I ANO
POBLACION DE
POBLACION DE
OTRO
I ANO
2 A 4 ANOS
(ESPECIFICAR)
20II
Usted considera que la poblacion oficial 2011 correspond a su poblacion observada?
Si = No=2
Se ha realizado un censo local?
Si =1 No=2
Si hay un censo: escriba la poblacion de <1 ano
fecha de
realizado
Hay un mapa de la zona de cobertura con poblacion?
Si =1 No=2
Si lo hay, tome una foto
Al momento de la encuesta: Conoce cuantos ninos faltan por vacunar con Pentavalente 3 para cumplir la meta del
2011?
Si=1 No=2
Comentarios
Existen mecanismos para recuperar a los ninos que no se vacunaron oportunamente?
Si=1 No=2
Comentarios
Estima mensualmente el indicador de desercion de DPT3 O Pentavalente3?
Si=1 en el mes Agosto de 2011 fue
No=2
Comentarios
65
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
Datos de vacunacion de pentavalente al mes de Agosto 2011
VACUNA
DE I ANO
POBLACION DE I
POBLACION DE 2 A 4
ANO
ANOS
PENTAVELENTE
SPR
PRIORIDAD EN LA GESTION DE LA RIS
Solo pensando en vacunacion regular en 20II (no incluye procedimientos de campana
PREGUNTA
RESPUESTA
I.
iEn este establecimiento iSe ofrece servicios de vacunacion todos los dias?
Si =l; No=2; No sabe=3
Anote el horario de atencion para vacunacion regular:
Desde
Hasta
# Horas
Si no se ofrece servicios de vacunacion todos los dias, iQue es lo que se lo impide?
2.
(Existe personal para que el servicio de inmunizaciones no se interrumpa cuando sale la responsable de
inmunizaciones a visitas domiciliarias O extramurales?
Si E No=2
3.
iSe han gestionado recursos adicionales para gastos operativos de la vacunacion regular?
Si =l; No=2; No sabe=3
4.
En su opinion, justed necesita mejorar la cobertura de vacunacion regular en su establecimiento?
Si No=2; No sabe=3
5.
;Ha implementado alguna estrategia para incrementar las coberturas de vacunacion?
Si i=l; = No=2; No sabe=3
6.
iQue estrategia ha usado para incrementar las coberturas?
iLa estrategia usada, ha sido efectiva? Explique:
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
66
RECURSOS HUMANOS
Numero de trabajadores en el servicio de inmunizaciones (personal en el establecimiento)
NOMBRE
CARGO
PROFESION
iCapacitado en los ultimos dos
=Responsable RIS
=Enfermera
anos por el Programa MCC-
2=Personal asistencial de
2=Enfermera SERUMS
ITP?
apoyo
=Tecnico en Enfermeria
3 3= Brigada AIDPED
4= dentista
Si la respuesta es si,
4-Otro: (especificar)
5-Otro
iQue curso?
iVirtual?
PREGUNTA
RESPUESTA
I.
;Se han realizado actividades de capacitacion para el personal de esta red en el area de inmunizaciones in 2011?
Si= I No=2
Si la respuesta es si, ien que temas?
2.
iQuien se encarga de las actividades de capacitacion en su establecimiento?
La misma responsable de inmunizaciones
La encargada de capacitacion del establecimiento.
Encargada de capacitacion de la DIRESA
Otro
3.
Opera una Brigada IB en el area de su establecimiento?
Si No=2
4.
IA su establecimiento le corresponde recibir reportes de produccion de vacunacion a traves de equipos IB?
Si I; No=2.
Si la respuesta es si, iDespues de cuantos dias de realizada la atencion le reporta?
5.
iComo se registra la informacion de IB?
Se integra la produccion de IB al establecimiento
La reporta por separado
iCuenta con datos de cobertura de las comunidades servidas por Brigadas?
Si - I; No=2
6.
iHace Ud. la supervision de las Brigadas?
Si E I; No=2
7.
iLa supervision de las brigadas es con frecuencia regular? Si = l; No=2.
Fecha de la ultima supervision regular
8.
iComo hace la supervision? (Se usa algun formulario?
Obtenga copia del formato
Si necesita, escriba comentarios sobre el funcionamiento de las brigadas:
67
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
CADENA DE FRiO
CADENA DE FRiO
si
NO
NA
OBSERVACIONES
iCuenta con equipos de cadena de frio (refrigeradoras,
congeladoras) que usa para almacenar vacunas?
iHa recibido equipos nuevos en el 2008 O 2009?
(EI inventario de cadena de frio esta actualizado incluyendo los
equipos nuevos?
iPuede mostrarme su plan de mantenimiento preventivo O
proyectos presentados?
iConsidera que las condiciones de su almacen son
adecuadas y corresponden a la norma tecnica?
EI local es propio
Tiene grupo electrogeno
Corresponden las dimensiones del area
Tiene alarma sonora por falla electrica
Tiene vacuna danada por altas O bajas temperaturas O vencida?
Como se descarta la vacuna danada O vencida?
ALMACENAMIENTO
si
NO
NA
OBSERVACIONES
iPuede mostrar un plan de contingencia ante cualquier evento que
signifique una ruptura de la cadena de frio? Anote la fecha
;Ha tenido suficiente capacidad de almacenamiento en el ano?
-Para la vacunacion regular
-Durante la campana
;Solo se almacenan vacunas en el refrigerador? Verifique que no
se guarden alimentos, bebidas, medicamentos, muestras O
hemoderivados.
iTiene registro de mantenimiento de equipos? Anote la ultima
fecha
iDescongela y limpia el refrigerador? Anote cada cuanto tiempo.
Verifique los registros de las fechas de descongelamiento en la
hoja de control de temperatura.
ROLES Y RESPONSABILIDADES
si
NO
NA
OBSERVACIONES
;Existe una persona de reemplazo del responsable para manejar y
almacenar las vacunas?
(Estas personas han recibido capacitacion apropiada sobre cadena
Han recibido alguna capacitacion del
de frio?
programa MCC-ITP
;Puede mostrar algun documento con instrucciones y politicas
para la administracion de la cadena de frio incluyendo: pedidos,
recepcion y almacenaje de vacunas y manejo de vacunas cuando el
equipo se dana?
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
68
iLas fallas de la cadena de frio son documentadas y reportadas al
responsable de inmunizaciones?
Descripcion del equipo donde se almacena la vacuna Pentavalente
DESCRIBA
ESCRIBA SEGUN CORRESPONDA
OBSERVACIONES
Tipo de equipo
Refrigerador = R; Refrigerador y Congelador = RC;
Congelador E C
Ano de compra
Menos de 2 anos
2 a 5 anos = I
6 a 10 anos = 2
10 O mas anos = 3
Energia
Electrica = E; Electrica y Gas = EG Electrica y kerosen E EK,
Gas G; Kerosen = K; Solar F
iTiene estabilizador?
Si = I, No=2
Estado del equipo/reparacion
Funciona y usa para vacunas =OK
No funciona por falta de combustible E I
No funciona porque falta reparacion = 2
No funciona lobsoleto =3
Otro = 4 Especifique
Fecha del ultimo mantenimiento
/
/
Dia
Mes no
No sabe
iTiene termometro?
Si E I, anote la marca y la temperatura No E 2
iUsa adecuadamente la hoja de control
Si = I, No =2
de temperatura?
(Verificar si esta marcada la temperatura al tiempo adecuado,
por ejemplo, es media manana no debe estar marcada la de la
tarde)
(EI enchufe esta marcado "no
desconectar"?
69
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
DISPONIBILIDAD DE VACUNAS E INSUMOS NECESARIOS
LISTA DE CHEQUEO RIS
si
NO
N/A
OBSERVACIONES
iTuvo desabastecimiento de vacunas desde enero de
2011?:
iDesabastecimiento de otros Insumos?:
Algodon
Jabon liquid
Jeringas
Cajas seguras
iTiene disponibilidad adecuada de vacunas con relacion a la programacion de las vacunas?: ESCRIBA EL STOCK DE
ACUERDO AL KARDEX
BCG
STOCK
Pentavalente
STOCK
Polio oral
STOCK
Fiebre Amarilla
STOCK
Sarampion, rubeola y paperas
STOCK
Hepatitis B
STOCK
Rotavirus
STOCK
Influenza
STOCK
Neumococo
STOCK
Otra, cual(es)?
STOCK
(Existen mecanismos de contingencia en caso exista
Precise cuales
falta de vacunas e insumos?
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
70
OBSERVE HASTA 5 NINOS SIENDO VACUNADOS CON LA VACUNA
PENTAVELENTE
Marque con una "X" si observa las siguientes practicas
I
2
3
4
5
COMENTARIOS
OBSERVE LAS SIGUIENTES
ACTIVIDADES
Ninola tiene DNI
Dosis: I, 2, O 3
Edad en meses
(EI paciente tiene cita previa?
iSe lava las manos antes de vacunar al
nino/a?
Observar la vacunacion
ldentificacion de la zona
(muslo cara lateral)
Asepsia
Fijacion
Introduccion de la aguja
Aspirado
Aplicacion
Consejeria
iRetapa la jeringa?
Utiliza jeringas descartables?
;Registra en el carne del nino las vacunas
aplicadas, fecha y lote de aplicacion?
(Se explica la informacion del carne al
responsable del nino?
iSe indica al responsable del nino la fecha en
que le corresponde la proxima vacuna?
iSe descarta la jeringa en un contenedor
adecuado?
71
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
COMUNICACION Y SATISFACCION CON EL SERVICIO DE
INMUNIZACIONES
Entreviste a 5 a 10 madres luego de la vacunacion de su hijo/a
Si = I; No=2
PREGUNTA
I
2
3
4
5
Sabe que vacuna(s) recibio el ninola
Sabe la dosis que recibio (I,2 O 3)
Sabe cuando debe volver por la siguiente dosis
Sabe que otras vacunas le faltan
Sabe que hacer si hay efectos secundarios
Sabe que se registro en el carne de vacunacion
EI trato a Ud. y al ninola puede ser mejorado 28
Tiene preguntas sobre la(s) vacuna(s) dadas su ninola hoy
Hay algo que le preocupe sobre las vacunas recibidas
PREGUNTA
6
7
8
9
10
Sabe que vacuna(s) recibio el ninola
Sabe la dosis que recibio (I,2 O 3)
Sabe cuando debe volver por la siguiente dosis
Sabe que otras vacunas le faltan
Sabe que hacer si hay efectos secundarios
Sabe que se registro en el carne de vacunacion
EI trato a Ud. y al ninola puede ser mejorado 29
Tiene preguntas sobre la(s) vacuna(s) dadas su ninola hoy
Hay algo que le preocupe sobre las vacunas recibidas
Si = I; No=2
28 Si responde que si, pregunte como.
29 Si responde que si, pregunte como.
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
72
BIOSEGURIDAD
1. Utiliza jeringas con aguja segura (autodestruible O autoretractable)?
Si =1 Describa
No=2;
No sabe=3
2. Descarta las jeringas en (marque con un X la practica mas comun, usual O regular- Solo una
respuesta):
a) Caja de seguridad
d) Tacho de basura
b) Botellas plasticas/galones
e) Cajas comunes de carton
c) Botellas plasticas/galones con lejia
f) Bolsas plasticas
3. En los recipientes de descarte SE OBSERVA:
Jeringas con agujas sin retapar
Si/No
Sin informacion
Jeringas con agujas retapadas
Si/No
Sin informacion
Jeringas sin agujas O solo agujas
Si/No
Sin informacion
4. E1 establecimiento tiene un sistema para destruccion O disposicion de ampollas usadas
Si =1 Describa
No-2;
No sabe=3
5. Donde se descartan las cajas de seguridad con jeringas y agujas usadas?
6. Describa otros recipientes de basura en el area de vacunacion si los hay
NOTAS DEL ENCUESTADOR SOBRE EL ESTABLECIMIENTO DE SALUD
1. Tome fotografias del establecimiento de salud:
a) Sala de espera si
no
b) Camara de frio O refrigerador de vacunas si
no
c) Sala de vacunacion si
no
d) Lavabo de manos si no
e) Mesa de preparaciones si
no
73
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
f) Cuaderno de registro de vacunaciones si
no
g) Computador en uso si
no
h) PDA en uso si
no
i)
Mapa de cobertura si
no
j) Otras observaciones:
2. Indique sus observaciones del centro O puesto:
a) Limpieza
si
no
b) Lleno de pacientes esperando si
no
c) Impresion de poco personal
si
no
d) Vacunacion es una prioridad si
no
e) Conservan el patrimonio
si
no
Otros comentarios y observaciones
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
74
ENCUESTA RAPIDA DEL FUNCIONAMIENTO DE LA ESTRATEGIA DE
INMUNIZACIONES
POST PROGRAMA MCC-ITP
Estimado Sr. Director de la Direccion Regional de Salud:
El Programa MCC-ITP de Inmunizaciones tuvo lugar de noviembre de 2008 a febrero de 2010 con
el objetivo de fortalecer la estrategia regional de inmunizaciones en 17 regiones. La presente
encuesta financiada por la Agencia Internacional para el Desarrollo del Gobierno de Estados Unidos
(USAID) tiene la finalidad de conocer la situacion actual en materia de inmunizaciones en su region
y los factores que contribuyeron a su mejoramiento y la sostenibilidad de las mejoras.
Agradecemos que complete el siguiente formulario de acuerdo a la situacion actual de la estrategia de
inmunizaciones en su region.
COMPONENTE IB
ACTIVIDAD
CANTIDAD
I.
iQue cantidad de brigadas habia en Diciembre 2010?
2.
iQue cantidad de brigadas hay ahora?
3.
iCuantas brigadas aun tienen los equipos donados por el programa MCC-ITP?
4.
iCuantas brigadas les faltan equipos?
5.
iTodas las brigadas usan sus PDAs?
si
no
Por favor haganos saber sus observaciones sobre el funcionamiento del componente IB en la
actualidad:
PLANEAMIENTO Y MONITOREO
ACTIVIDAD
SI
NO
I
iSe formulo un Plan Regional de Inmunizaciones para 2011?
2
;EI presupuesto aprobado es suficiente? iCuanto es?
3
iSe realiza el monitoreo de coberturas con la matriz elaborada por el programa MCC-ITP?
4
iCual es el porcentaje de cobertura de vacuna pentavalente3 al 31 de agosto 201
5
iCual es el porcentaje de cobertura de vacuna SPR al 31 de agosto 2011?
Por favor, haganos saber sus otras observaciones sobre el funcionamiento del componente de
planificacion y monitoreo:
75
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
SISTEMA DE INFORMACION
ACTIVIDAD
SI
NO
I
iUsa Ud. el Sistema de Informacion Integrado de Inmunizaciones (SIII)?
2
iTodos los establecimientos de salud aplican el SIII?
3
iSe registra la vacunacion de NO asegurados en formato unico SIS en todos los EESS?
4
iSe elaboro el reporte de inmunizaciones del SIS del mes de Agosto de 2011?
5
iPuede Ud. elaborar reportes web con el sistema SIS?
Por favor, haganos saber sus otras observaciones sobre el funcionamiento del Sistema de
Informacion:
SISTEMA DE SUMINISTROS
ACTIVIDAD
SI
NO
I.
(Los equipos de cadena de frio estan registrados en el SIGA patrimonial?
2.
;Ha tenido dificultad para almacenar todas las vacunas recibidas en 2011?
3.
iTiene instaladas camaras de frio?
4.
iLa region tiene fondos para distribuir las vacunas en forma oportuna a todos los EESS?
5.
;Hubo desabastecimiento de vacunas en la region en el trimestre de Julio-Agosto-Setiembre de
2011?
6.
iTodas las computadoras donadas por el Programa MCC-ITP estan aun funcionando en su region?
Por favor, haganos saber sus otras observaciones sobre el funcionamiento de la Cadena de Frio en
su region:
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
76
ANNEX C.2 C-DHS VACCINATION COVERAGE ANALYSIS
The C-DHS estimates vaccination coverage in urban and rural locales and at the national level;
however, in regions, the sample is too small to provide robust estimates. Since the C-DHS is a
sample-based survey, results are only estimates of the true coverage value. It is conducted on a
subsample of the standard, five-year DHS survey sample SO it is important to consider the sample
size and confidence intervals (CI= + two standard deviations, SD) in describing coverage estimates.
In 2010, the national sample was 1747 persons under one year of age and the rural and urban
samples were 611 and 1136 persons, respectively Sample sizes for Selected Regions in this
assessment were: Amazonas 83, Apurimac 79, Cusco 75, Puno 77. These sample sizes determined
95% CI that can be seen in Figs. 1 and 2.
Figure I
Coverage with DPT3 + 2SD
Continuous DHS, Peru 2010
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
77
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
Figure 2
Coverage with MMR + 2SD
Continuous DHS, Peru 2010
100
90
80
70
60
50
The pink bands describe the CI around the estimated national coverage rates of 73.7+2.9% for
DPT3 and 83.4+2.4% for MMR. In neither case did national rates reach the 95% goal in 2010. The
points on the graphs are the estimated coverage rates for regions and urban/rural populations, while
the vertical lines represent the 95% confidence limits (signifying that the true value lies within that
range with 95% probablility) While five regions have estimated rates above and two have rates
below the band, the CI of all but Apurimac lie within the band, signifying that they are not
statistically different from the estimated national rate. Thus, while the national estimate is valid for
the whole Peruvian population within the CI shown, inter-region comparisons of estimated coverage
rates are indicative but not statistically significant.
Furthermore, the C-DHS collects immunization information for children 18 to 24 months of age,
i.e. at least one year before the survey. Thus, coverage reported in the 2009 C-DHS corresponds to
vaccinations received in 2007-2008 (before MCC-ITP) and are not comparable to 2009 HIS
administrative coverages published by the MOH.
The source of information in the C-DHS is children's health cards ("'carnets") when available and
legible, or mothers' recall. The increasing complexity of the immunization schedule confuses
mothers recall of which vaccines were administered at birth, two, four, six and twelve months (the
Team found that not even all nurses administering the vaccines remember the schedule). In addition,
each health region has printed its own version of the carnet with slightly different contents and
previous versions still circulate with the most recent ones, making data collection confusing at best.
A further analysis of the C-DHS can be seen in a time series of estimated coverage. Fig 3 shows
estimates of national coverage from the C-DHS of 2008 and 2009 (before MCC-ITP) and 2010
(corresponding to 2009, first full year of MCC-ITP). The 2011 C-DHS is not yet available to
evaluate 2010 coverage in the final year of the MCC-ITP. Thus, at the end of MCC-ITP in February
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
78
2011, the C-DHS could not provide conclusive, vaccination coverage information nor credible
comparisons between and within regions
Figure 3
Vaccination Coverage Rates
DHS Peru, 2008, 2009, 2010
100
80
60
National
40
20
Rural
0
Urban
2008 2009 2010 2008 2009 2010 2008 2009 2010
DPT3
MMR
ALL VACCINES
The MOH'S General Office of Statistics and Informatics (OGEI) operates the national Health
Information System (HIS) which collects data on immunization services provided by the MOH and
social security insitute (ESSALUD) MOH vaccination services cover approximately 67% of the
population, ESSALUD 10% and the rest is covered by pharmacies, private clinics and
practitioners The coverage indicator calculated by the OGEI divides the number of reported
DPT3 and MMR vaccinations by the projected under one-year age population for the same period
according to the 2007 census. Thus, even if the HIS reports all vaccinations provided by the public
sector, it should logically not give much more than 77% coverage. Fig 5 shows HIS national
coverage at 92% for DPT3 in 2009 (comparable to C-DHS 2010) which seems unreasonably high,
especially in light of the C-DHS which estimates 73.7+2.9% for DPT3.
30 C-DHS 2010, analysis of survey data.
79
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
Figure 4
Coverage with DPTR 2006-
2010
OGEI-MINSA, Peru
150
2006
100
2007
50
0
2008
2009
2010
As can be seen in Figure 4, the regional results are also at odds with the C-DHS. For example,
Huancavelica appears to have 63% coverage with DPT3 in HIS statistics for 2009 while the C-DHS
estimates 92.1+6.7% (Fig 1). This is explained by several factors which are recognized by OGEI:
Late and incomplete reporting to the HIS which reduces the number of vaccinations
administered (numerator)
Migrations which can cause over and under delivery of services (numerator)
Under and over estimates of census-projected populations (denominator)
Given the uncertainties surrounding the previous two cases, in mid-2010 MCC-ITP undertook
a
household sample survey in the eight targeted regions (conducted by the Quanto Company) to
provide a third, and presumably more credible, estimate of coverage rates. The eight-region sample
was 2329 households (vs. 1747 in the C-DHS) which gave a slightly smaller CI for regional,
urban/rural coverage estimates. The Quanto survey investigated children in three age cohorts: 6-11,
12-23 and 24-36 months of age and estimated regional DPT3 coverage in 2009 at 84% (no CI
given), intermediate between the C-DHS and the HIS.
Fig 5 compares the results for coverage statistics and estimates from the three sources for 2010.
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
80
Figure 5
DPT3 Coverage by Source
100
Peru 2010
80
60
OGEI
40
Cuanto
DHS
It should be pointed out that surveys and censuses are cross-sectional, conducted at certain
moments and reflect conditions prevalent at that moment in the population. However, populations
migrate SO that a survey or census conducted in March is not representative of conditions in August
or December. On the other hand, the HIS captures all vaccinations provided during a year - it is
longitudinal - but only for that part of the population served by the public sector.
In summary, the cross-sectional, sample-based DHS gives coverage estimates for the whole country,
down to the regional level within specified confidence limits and for a given moment in time. The
HIS is accurate for the population covered by the public sector, primarily the poor and indigent,
with recognized reporting flaws. The cross-sectional Quanto survey was a one-time effort,
conducted in eight regions at a different time in an attempt to resolve the differences between the
previous two. The temporal and population relations are shown in the following schematic:
Total
D
popu-
HIS
lation
SIS
H
u
Population served by
S
a
public sector (77%)
n
ITimeline 1 year
This Assessment concludes that the best available estimate of national coverage rates is the C-DHS
but, because of the time lag between the cohort being investigated and time of vaccination, it is not
useful for program monitoring or evaluation. In addition, the small regional samples do not allow
for meaningful comparisons of the "targeted regions, each of which received similar levels of
program support" and presumably should have had similar coverage rates.
81
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
Timeline of MCC-ITP
2006
GOP requests support from MCC for a Threshold program
January 2007
GOP-MCC Negotiations start and MOH committee develops proposal: Ma. Ana Mendoza, ESNI; Lidia
Mendoza, OGEI; Hernan Roig, Coop Int. ; Jose Marconi, DGSP
February 2007
GOP submits proposal
November 2007
Informal news that proposal was approved
March 2008
Proposal is approved and MOH enters agreement between GOP and USG
March 2008
MOH appoints DGSP Director and ESNI Coordinator in charge of developing and coordinating the
implementation of the ITP in coordination with USAID
June 2008
GOP and USG sign agreement: S/35,585,000 to:
Increase coverage to 95% in 8 regions, 2.
Reduce to I week time for itinerant brigades to report, and
Reduce information errors by 50%
USAID No. 527-0422:
Strengthen AIDPED brigades (program component I)
Strengthen management capacity of cold chain and immunization through training
(component 2)
Strengthen information system (component 3)
October 2008
Abt Associates is awarded the contract and appoints Dr. Ada Pastor to manage the ITP
November 12, 2008
Letter from Yehude Simon Munaro, PCM President correcting mistaken estimate for DPT3 coverage
rate for 2007 from 82% to 94.7%, (and even as high as 96.9% due to late reporting) resulting from the
substitution of Pentavalent vaccine for DPT.
December 2008
PAHO confirms Peru's DPT/Pentavalent 3 coverage as 94.7%
March 27, 2009
Letter from Dr. Ugarte, MOH, to Paul Weisenfeld requesting changes to the projects SOW:
Communication: instead of radios, PDAs are requested for the IB and printers are requested
to be purchased with the computers for the 8 target regions
Development of a module in the SIGA system for cold chain equipment that would update
the current Excel-based inventory system, FOX-Pro license is no longer needed
Replace the creation of a new information system for the strengthening of the SIS to include
recording and report of immunizations
July 30, 2009
Email from Paul Weisenfeld, USAID mission director confirms Peru's ineligibility for a MCC compact
due to World Bank's classification of Peru as a middle income country
December 15, 2010
Vice-Minister Zarela Esther Solis Vazquez requests ITP to implement activities not yet carried out and
to support I. Information system assistance, 2. Cold Chain Management Training 3. Information
tools training. Recommendations from the logistics study are considered no longer relevant.
February 2011
ITP closes
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
82
ANNEX D LIST OF DOCUMENTS CONSULTED
FROM INEI
Encuesta Demografica y de Salud 2006, INEI, Lima
Encuesta Demografica y de Salud 2007, INEI, Lima
Encuesta Demografica y de Salud 2008, INEI, Lima
Encuesta Demografica y de Salud 2009, INEI, Lima
Encuesta Demografica y de Salud 2010, INEI, Lima
Perfil Sociodemografico del Peru, Censos Nacionales 2007: XI de Poblacion y VI de
Vivienda, Instituto Nacional de Estadistica e Informatica, Lima 2008.
Encuesta Demografica y de Salud Familiar 2007-2008, Instituto Nacional de Estadistica e
Informatica, Lima 2009
FROM USAID
USAID Evaluation Policy
Peru Threshold Program: Data Quality Review and Midterm Assessment, CAMRIS,
Washington DC 2011
RFTOP MCC 527-08-09, Immunization program Population, Health, and Nutrition
Technical
Assessment of three USAID/Per Health Projects Implemented by the Ministry of Health:
Report No. 10-001-259, GHTech, 2010
USAID Country Health Statistical Report Peru December 2009
Human Resource Development in Health: System for the Development of Competencies in
Peru, February 2010
Using Information for Local Health Management in Peru February 2010
DISCLAIMER tance and Support Contract 3- Global Health (TASC 3 - Global Health)
IQC
Checklist for Assessing USAID Evaluation Reports
FROM MCC-ITP
htip://inmunizacionesprogramaumbralpelpreguntasolasp
tp:/ /inmunizaciones.progtamaumbralpe/progtamaol.ast Close of MCP en Ancash -
good suggestions for sustainability.
htp//imuizacionesprogramaunbmalpenoticiasdescaspid-ill
83
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
http://www.minsa.gob.pe/portada/esninm_defaultasp. Immunization Strategy web page
htp://www.minsa.gob.pe/portada/esninm_defaultasp- Immunization Coverage per MOH
Threshold Immunization Program: Monitoring and Evaluation Plan: November 2008
Gerencia en Inmunizaciones - Modulos de Diploma Virtual, Yanina Loyola, 2010
Modulos de Capacitacion, AIESPED
Propuestas para la Construccion de un Modelo de Atencion Inclusivo en Salud para las
Poblaciones Rurales Excluidas y Dispersas. Noviembre 2010.
Analisis del Proceso Logistico de las Vacunas en sus Diferentes Niveles: Diagnostico de
Suministro de Vacunas: Informe de Consultaria: Dr. Hernan Garcia y Dra. Cecilia Lengua,
Mayo 2010.
Plan de Mejora de Cadena de Suministro de Vacunas del MINSA, Nivel Nacional y Regional
Informe de Consultaria: Dr. Hernan Garcia y Dra. Cecilia Lengua, Diciembre 2010.
Guia SIGA Patrimonio,
Sistema de Informacion Integrado de Inmunizaciones (SIII) Guia Metodologica para la
Capacitacion de Supervisores del SIII
Sistematizacion de la experiencia exitosa en la obtencion de recursos publicos adicionales
para el financiamiento de las actividades de inmunizacion en el Peru. Informe Final Carlos
Meza Dextre. Agosto 2010
Contract No. GHS-1-00-07-00003 TO 365, p. 21, Abt Assoc, USAID/Peru 2008
MCC - Threshold Country Program (Tcp) Peru, Quarterly Report Q2 FY 2011, January 1,
2011 - March 31, 2011, USAID/Peru
Tercer Informe Trimestral, Programa ITP, Abt Associates Lima 2010
MCC-ITP Component 2: Threshold Immunization Program, Monitoring and Evaluation
Plan, November 2008, USAID/Peru
Estudio Diagnostico de la Estrategia Nacional de Inmunizaciones del Ministerio de Salud,
Evaluacion Anual 2008 - 2009 Mayo 2010
Procurement Report, USAID/ITP, Abt Assoc. Lima 2009
Informe y propuesta tecnica para la atencion de salud en zonas excluidas y dispersas. ITP,
Lima 2008.
htip://inmunizacionesprogtamaumbralpe/recursosolasp
Informe De Cierre Programa Umbral De Inmunizaciones, Region Ancash: Resultado
y
Rendeneshtip/omuizcioresprogramaunbrlperoticasdescasp:-ll
Analisis Del Proceso Logistico De Las Vacunas En Sus Diferentes Niveles: Diagnostico De
Suministro De Vacunas. USAID/Peru, 2010
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
84
Estudio Diagnostico De La Estrategia Nacional De Inmunizaciones (ESNI) Del Ministerio
De Salud, USAID/Peru, 2009
ITP Final Report, Abt Assoc., Lima 2011
Plan de Mejora de Cadena de Suministro de Vacunas del MOH, Dr. Hernan Garcia, Dra.
Cecilia Lengua, MCC-ITP, Lima, 2010.
Si Su Nino Esta sano, Nosotros Somos Mejores, Conocimientos, Actitudes y Practicas en
Turno a la Vacuna, Estudio Cualitativo, Programa ITP, Abt Assoc. Lima 2011
Plan of Operations for the Threshold Program of Immunizations, Abt, Peru 2008-2010
Informe y propuesta tecnica para la atencion de salud en zonas excluidas y dispersas, Maria
Tello Acho, Lima 2008.
El Costo - efectividad de la Atencion Integral de Salud para Poblaciones Excluidas y
Dispersas (AISPED), Giovanni Alarcon, 21 de Enero de 2011
Millennium Challenge Corporation Threshold Country Program (TCP) Peru Quarterly
Report Q2 FY 2011, January 1, 2011-March 31, 2011
Plan Regional de Mantenimiento de Equipos de Cadena de Frio 2012 - (draft) Noviembre
2011.
FROM MEF
Intervencion Publica Evaluada: Servicio de Vacunacion. MEF, Lima 2011
FROM MOH
Resolucion Ministerial No. 457-2009/MOH Ministerio de Salud, Lima 2009.
Resolucion Ministerial No.614-2010/MOH Ministerio de Salud, Lima 2010.
Norma Tecnica: Atencion Integral de Salud a Poblaciones Excluidas y Dispersas. RM-478-
2009/MOH, Lima 2009
Relacion de participantes para el curso virtual de especializacion de gerencia en
inmunizaciones, MSDG, MINSA
Plan Operativo Anual de Inmunizaciones, region Amazonas, Chachapoyas, 20 Abril, 2011.
PLAN REGIONAL DE LA ESTRATEGIA SANITARIA DE INMUNIZACIONES,
Apurimac, Abancay, Diciembre 2010
Norma Tecnicas de Salud que Establece el Esquema Nacional de Vacunacion,
MINSA/DGSP
Instrumentos Para la Supervision, (de Plan de Accion y Linimientos Tecnicos de la Campana
de Vacunacion para el Barrido de Polio y Sarampion -Rubeola, 2011.
85
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
ANNEX E LIST OF CONTACTS
SOCIAL IMPACT MCC-ITP ASSESSMENT
People Contacted
NAME
ROLE/
CONTACT INFO
DATE
CONTACTED BY
ORGANIZATION
Kathleen Novak
Abt Associtates
301-347-532|
EB, RS
kathleen novak@abtassoc.com
9/13/1|
Jim Heinzen
Camris
(703)548-6713
EB, RS
Bruce Kay
MCC
Enrique Paz
UNICEF - Panama
507-301-7403 epaz@unicef.org
Luis Seminario
USAID
988544422 Iseminario@usaid.gov
9-26-1
DN,EB,RS,PM
Mirian Choy
PDP/USAID
980127328 mchoy@usaid.gov
9-26-|
DN,EB,RS,PM
Theresa Herscowitz
USAID
618-1267 therscowitz@usaid.gov
9-26-|
DN,EB,RS,PM
Jo Jean Elenes
Chief HEO/USAID
618-1267
9-26-1|
DN,EB,RS,PM
Myrian Sarco
USAID
618-1267
9-26-1
DN,EB,RS,PM
Dr. Ada Pastor
USAID/MCC-ITP
9-26-1
DN,EB,RS,PM
Dr Sonia Hilser
MINSA/CI
985945927 shilserv@minsa.gob.pe
9-27-1
DN,EB,RS,PM
Arq. Hernan Roig
MINSA/CI
3156600 ext 2412
9-27-1|
DN,EB,RS,PM
hroiga@minsa.gob.pe
Dr. Luz lllescas
CAMRIS
989295094
9-27-||
DN
luzillescasr@yahoo.com
Gerardo Morris
PCM/Unbral
996293295
9-27-1|
DN,EB,RS,PM
gmorris@pcm.gob.pe
Julio Cesar Naveda
PCM/Unbral
985044135
9-27-| I
DN,EB,RS,PM
inaveda@pcm.gob.pe
Midori de Habich
USAID/Politicas en Salud-Abt
4176000
9-28-|
DN
mdehabich@polsalud.org
Patricia Mostajo
USAID/Politicas en Salud-Abt
4176000
9-28-|
DN
pmostajo@polsalud.org
Arturo Granados
USAID/Politicas en Salud-Abt
4176000
9-28-|
DN
agranados@polsalud.org
Dr. Oscar Cordon
USAID/Quality Healthcare-Quimonics
985629907
9-28-|
DN
ocordon@calidadensalud.pe
Dr. Lengua, Dr. Garcia
9-28-|
DN,EB,RS,PM
Fabiola Quiroz
UNICEF
9-29-II
DN
Judith Aguinaga
JHU-Abt
9-29-1
DN,EB,RS,PM
Dr. Hamilton Garcia
DGPS/MOH
10-4-1
DN, RS
Laura Veramendi
DGPS/MOH
10-4-1
DN,RS
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
86
NAME
ROLE/
CONTACT INFO
DATE
CONTACTED BY
ORGANIZATION
Aquiles Vilches
DG Epidemiologia
MINSA
10-4-1
DN,RS
Maria Ticona
DG Epidemiologia
MINSA
10-4-1
DN,RS
Gladys Turpo
DG Epidemiologia
MINSA
10-4-1|
DN,RS
Jorge Uchuya
DG Epidemiologia
MINSA
10-4-1|
DN,RS
Edward Ochoa
Responsable SIS DIRESA Cusco
edwardochoav@hotmail.com Cel
13-oct-|
EB, PM
984994800
Efrain Sarmiento
Equipo Tecnico SiS DIRESA Cusco
Cel 984622760 efrainsh4@hotmail.com
13-oct-|
EB, PM
Jesus Fuentes Mujica
Medico Jefe CS Manco Capac,
12-oct-|
EB, PM
Cusco
Efrain Gonzales
Responsable Est. E Informatica CS
becerraefra@hotmail.com
12-oct-|
EB, PM
Becerra
Ttio, Cusco
Mario Cornejo
Director General, DIRESA Cusco
10-oct-|
EB, PM
Julio Cesar Vargas
Sub Director, DIRESA Cusco
10-oct-|
EB, PM
Zonia Rozas Huacho
Directora Ejecutiva de Salud
Cel 984627566 zrozas@hotmail.com
10-oct-|
EB, PM
Individual, Cusco
Angelica Zapata
Cusco
leohuaran@hotmail.com
10-oct-|
EB, PM
Javier Ramirez
Responsable Cadena de Frio
jrg III@hotmail.com
10-oct-|
EB, PM
Gutierrez
DIRESA, Cusco
Pablo Grajeda
Director de Inteligencia Sanitaria
10-oct-|
PM
DIRESA Cusco
Isabel Fuentes
Directora de Estadisticas, DIRESA
isabelf9@hotmail.com
10-oct-| I
PM
Cusco
Erika Chalco Merma
Responsable Etapa de Vida Nino,
docarri e@hotmail.com
10-oct-|
EB, PM
DIRESA Cusco
Tania Saldivar Tapia
Responsable ESRI Cusco
Cel 984572419 taniali6@hotmail.com
10-oct-|
EB, PM
Mabel Sarmiento
Coordinadora Estrategia No
notransmisiblescusco@yahoo.com.pe
10-oct-|
EB, PM
Huanca
Transmisibles, DIRESA, Cusco
Dario Navarro
Director de la Red Cusco Sur,
I-oct-|
EB, PM
Mendoza
Cusco
Lilian Karina Lima
Coordinadora ES Cusco Sur,
lilikg@hotmail.com
I-oct-|
EB, PM
Grajeda
Cusco
Marina Quiroga Cana
Jefa ODIS Cusco Sur, Cusco
marinaquiroga@hotmail.com
I-oct-|
EB, PM
Juan Lopez Munoz
Gerente CLAS San Jeronimo,
clas_sanjeronimo@yahoo.es
I-oct- I
EB, PM
Cusco
Daysi Sota Paz
Responsable Inmunizaciones San
Cel 974350067
I-oct-|
EB, PM
Jeronimo, Cusco
87
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
Olga Apaza Zela
Directora de la Oficina de
17-oct-| I
EB, PM
Aseguramiento, Puno
NAME
ROLE/
CONTACT INFO
DATE
CONTACTED BY
ORGANIZATION
Rudy Tico Chayna
Director de Aseguramiento Publico,
ticorudy@hotmail.com Te 51-365303
17-oct-|
EB, PM
Puno
Maria Linares
ODSIS Puno
mlinares@sis.gob.pe Tel 051-363677
17-oct-|
EB, PM
Antonia Figueroa
Encargada, Area de Analisis
tukyfigueroa@hotmail.com Cel
17-oct-|
PM
Ramos
Epidemiologico, Puno
951711246
Antonio Olazabal
Director, Atencion Integral de
olazabalch@hotmail.com Cel
17-oct-|
EB, PM
Chayna
Salud, Puno
951749229
Gabiana Ticona
Enfermera, AIS Nino, REDESS
chevetomim@hotmail.com
19-oct-|
EB, PM
Cacasaca
Chucuito, Puno
Alicia Quispe Quispe
Enfermera ESNI, REDESS Chucuito,
alicia r63@hotmail.com
19-oct-|
EB, PM
Puno
Wilder Cruz Ticona
Director ODI, REDESS Chucuito,
Wcruztmd_900009@hotmail.com
19-oct-|
EB, PM
Puno
Juan de Dios Velasquez
Estadistico, REDESS Chucuito, Puno
Polayjvp_I0@hotmail.com
19-oct-|
EB, PM
Pimentel
Zenaida Cruz Ortega
Farmaceutica, SISMED REDESS
zenaida cruz@hotmail.com
19-oct-|
EB, PM
Chucuito, Puno
Emilia Lupaca
Enfermera, AIs Adulto Mayor,
elura30@hotmail.com
19-oct-|
EB, PM
Valeriano
Chucuito, Puno, Puno
Honorata Ortega B.
Enfermera ESRI DIRESA Puno
norita294@hotmail.com
19-oct-|
EB, PM
Juana Pilco Monroy
Enfermera ESNI Microrred Juli,
juanapilcomonroy@hotmail.com
19-oct-|
EB, PM
Puno
Gloria Suana Munoz
Enfermera, Epidemiologia,
gloriairene@hotmail.com
19-oct-|
EB, PM
Chucuito, Puno
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
88
NAME
POSITION
ORG.
ADDRESS
PHONE
CELL
EMAIL
Rofilia Ramirez
Directora Tecnica de
INEI
Gral. Garzon 654,
610 5200/ 203
433 8284
patricia.huapaya@inei.gob.p
Demografia e
Jesus Maria
2640 Central
Jefatura,
e (Asist Direccion);
indicadores sociales
203 9280
652 0082
rofilia.ramirez@inei.gob.pe;
(ENDES)
Directo, 997
Demografia
maria.manotupa@inei.gob.p
567 422 Rofilia
e Ind.
e
Ramirez
Sociales
Dr. Fernando
Responsable ENDES
INEI
Gral. Garzon 654,
652 0000 433
jrios@paho.org;
Gonzales
Jesus Maria
4223
jrios@paho.org
Dra. Sonia
Directora General de
MINSA - Coop.
Salaverry 80I
315 6600 Ax
shilserv@minsa.gob.pe,
Hilser
Cooperacion
Internacional
2408
Ivasquezq@minsa.gob.pe
Internacional
Eva. Guerrero
Director General,
MINSA
Av. Arequipa 810, 4
988 030
eguerreroc@minsa.gob.pe
Oficina General de
Descentralizacion
piso
320
Descentralizacion
Dr. Roly Cruz
Inmunizaciones
MINSA - DGE
Av. Salaverry 80I,
315 6600
rcruz@minsa.gob.pe
Jefe Estadistica
(edistica)
2do. Piso Jesus
Maria
Manuel Vargas
Director
MINSA - DIGEMID -
Calle Coronel
422 8456/422
996 069 996 069
dg@digemid.minsa.gob.pe
Dir General de
Odriozola II, San
9200
337
Medicamentos
Isidro.
Insumos y Drogas
Carmen Cuevas,
Funcionarios DIGEMID
MINSA - DIGEMID
Calle Coronel
422 8456/422
Pedro ljarasca
Odriozola I I, San
9200
Isidro.
Lic. Ma. Ana
Coord. Nacional
MINSA ESNI
Av. Salaverry 80I,
315 6600, Ax
952 324
mmendoza@minsa.gob.pe;
Mendoza
Jesus Maria
2664
679
plandeo@minsa.gob.pe
Dr. Luis Alberto
Director
MINSA- SIS
Av. Carlos
6273800 Ax
562 0 025
alhuarachi@sis.gob.pe,
Huarachi Jose
Gonzales, Urb.
1010, Directo
director
gzambrano@sis.gob.pe
Carlos del
Maranga, San Miguel
464 7238
Adj. Liz
Carmen,
(altura Metro,
Meneces
Director
costado Edelnor)
Sec.
Adjunto
Leyda Sanchez
Supervisora de
MINSA-Adquisiciones
Av. Salaverry 80I,
315 6600 Ax
Logistica (se realizan
Jesus Maria
2305, 2306
todas las adquisiciones)
No conocen a Vilma
Vargas
Dr. Carlos
Director General
MINSA DG Salud de
Av. Salaverry 80I,
Directo: 315
cacosta@minsa.gob.pe;
Acosta
las personas
Jesus Maria
6687 /315
dlopeze@minsa.gob.pe
6600 Ax
Hamilton Garcia
Director General
MINSA - Promocion
Av. Salaverry 80I,
315 6600 Ax
hgsrcia@minsa.gob.pe,
Diaz
de la Salud
Jesus Maria
2658
tlazo@minsa.gob.pe
Flor Garcia, Julio
Oficina General de
MINSA - OGPP
Av. Salaverry 80I,
315 6600
Canseco
Planificacion y
Jesus Maria
Presupuesto
89
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
NAME
POSITION
ORG.
ADDRESS
PHONE
CELL
EMAIL
Pablo Cordova
DG Estadistica e
MINSA DGEI
Av. Salaverry 80I,
315 6600 Ax
Informatica
Jesus Maria
2658
Lesly Aliaga
Directora de
MINSA - DGEI
Av. Salaverry 80I,
315 6600 Ax
Desarrollo
Jesus Maria
2658
Tecnologico
Dr. Luis Suarez
Director General
MINSA
316 6600 Ax
Isuarez@dge.gob.pe
Ognio
Epidemiologia
4614239 Ax
pquevedo.dge.gob.pe
13, 461 3679,
461|3687
Walter Curioso
Director General
MINSA - Estadistica
Av. Salaverry 80I,
315 6600 Ax.
wcurioso@minsa.gob.pe,
Vilchez
e Informatica
Jesus Maria
2301
fbarrenechea@minsa.gob.pe
Eco. Leonardo
Director General
MINSA -
Av. Salaverry 80I,
Directo 315
rvalenciar@minsa.gob.pe
Paz Puelles
(Jefe
Plaaneamiento e
Jesus Maria
6678, central
(derivo atencion
Inversiones
315 6600 Ax
al Sr. Slor
(Planeamiento y
2826
Garcia)
Gestion
Institucional)
Quim. Carmen
Directora
MINSA -
Jr. Nazca 548, Jesus
628 576I, 66 y
cponce@minsa.gob.pe,
Ponce
Abastecimiento de
Maria
67
melespuru@minsa.gob.pe
recursos
estrategicos en salud
Eco. Segundo
Director General
MINSA - Oficina
Av. Salaverry 80I,
Directo 315
sdiazh@minsa.gob.pe,
Diaz Hernandez
Genera de
Jesus Maria
6680, central
eperezv@minsa.gob.pe
Administracion
315 6600 Ax
2115
Juan Pablo Silva
Director General
MEF - Direccion de
Junin 319 Lima
jpsilva@mef.gon.pe,
Calidad del Gasto
mtejada@mef.gob.pe
Washington
Inmunizaciones
OPS (PAHO)
Los Pinos 25I, Urb.
3195700,
wtoledo@per.ops-oms.org;
Toledo
Camacho, La Molinaa
directo:
aplenge@per.ops-oms.org
(costado lglesia la
3195767
Resureccion, espalda
Wong)
Sr. Ben
Coordinador Umbral
Av. Javier Prado
42| 6322
999 099
cberiso@comsa.com.pe
Schneider
Oeste 1661 San Isidro
93I
Gerardo Morris
PCM
447 2549, 242
996 293
gmorris@pcm.gob.pe
0925
295
Judith Aguinaga
Coordinaroa de
Redess Jovenes
2 de Mayo 315, San
628 6043
995 994
jaguinagall@yahoo.com
Proyectos
(ohnn Hopkins)
Isidro
776, RPM
#87| 869
Mario Tavera
Oficial de Salud
UNICEF
Pque. Meliton Porras
612 07 07 Ax
mtavera@unicef.org;
350, Miraflores
740
rfernandez@unicef.org
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
90
NAME
POSITION
ORG.
ADDRESS
PHONE
CELL
EMAIL
Danilo
997 35| 743
dfernandez39@yahoo.es
Fernandez
DRA. ZONIA
Directora Ejecutiva
DIRESA
084-581564 o
984 627 566
zrozas@hotmail.com
ROZAS
Salud Individual
CUSCO
084-581562.
DR. PABLO
Director Ejecutivo
984 603 297
diresacusco_dg@yahoo.es
GRAJEDA
Inteligencia Sanitaria
DANTE
DIRESA PUNO
JR. 7 DE
95 613 253
POLLOYQUERI
JUNIO No 352
MAMANI
URB. CHANU
PUNO
Eco. Jose Arista
Presidente
Gobierno
Prolongacion
04| 477 796 /
jarista@regionamazonas.gog.pe,
Regional
Ortiz Arrieta
478 13
oampuero@regionamazonas.gog.pe
Amazonas
1250,
Chachapoyas
Dr. Agusto
Vice Presidente
Gobierno
Prolongacion
42 477 796 /
Wong
Regional
Ortiz Arrieta
478 13I
Amazonas
1250,
Chachapoyas
Jenny Nunez
Gerente de
Gobierno
Prolongacion
42 477 796 /
Desarrollo Social
Regional
Ortiz Arrieta
478 13
Amazonas
1250,
Chachapoyas
Dr. Francisco
Director General
DIRESA
Jr. EI Triunfo
04| 477 960
framos@diresamazonas.gob.pe,
Ramos Santillan
Amazonas
Cdra 3 s/n
Chachapoyas
Dra. Janet Valle
Sub-directora
DIRESA
Jr. EI Triunfo
Regional de Salud,
Amazonas
cuadra 3
Amazonas
Chachapoya
Jenny Nunez
Gerente de
Gobierno
Desarrollo Social
Regional
Amazonas
Alfredo Diaz
Jefe de
DIRESA
Jr. EI Triunfo
comunicaciones
Amazonas
cuadra 3
Chachapoyas
Ponciano
Almacen Regional,
DIRESA
Jr. EI Triunfo
Alvarado, JC
Responsable de
Amazonas
cuadra 3
Saldano
Patrimonio
Chachapoyas
Agustin Alba
Jefe de DIREMID
DIRESA
Jr. EI Triunfo
Diaz
Amazonas
cuadra 3
Chachapoyas
Bernardino
Responsable cadena
DIRESA
Jr. EI Triunfo
Villeras, Claudio
de Frio,
Amazonas
cuadra 3
Pinzon
DIREMID
Chachapoyas
Juanito Torres
Jefe de Oficina
DIRESA
Jr. EI Triunfo
Ejecutiva de
Amazonas
cuadra 3
Estadistica e
Chachapoyas
Informatica
91
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
NAME
POSITION
ORG.
ADDRESS
PHONE
CELL
EMAIL
Geovanna
Coordinador AISPED
DIRESA
Jr. EI Triunfo
Pachas
Amazonas
cuadra 3
Chachapoyas
Manuel Rivas
Gerente de
DIRESA
Jr. EI Triunfo
Estrategias de Salud
Amazonas
cuadra 3
Chachapoyas
Esther
Responsable ESRI
DIRESA
Jr. EI Triunfo
Manchena
Regiona
Amazonas
cuadra 3
Chachapoyas
Rosemery
Directora Micro-red
Micro-red
Chachapoyas
Poema
Chachapoyas
Chachapoyas
NAME
POSITION
INSTITUTION
CONTACT INFORMATION
Dr. Roberto Romero
Asesor a Gerencia
Seguro Integral de Salud (SIS)
Dr. Pedro Rojas
Asistente
SIS
Dr. Miguel Avila
Asistente
SIS
Martin Vasquez C.
Consultor informatico UMBRAL, responsable
Lima
989037784
del IIIS y Gis
Dra. Lengua, Dr. Garcia
Consultores UMBRAL - sistema de
Lima
inmunizaciones
Victor Rosangel, Huber
Sectorialistas de Salud
MEF
3115930 ext 2175
Gonzalez
Hgonzalez@mef.gob.pe
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
92
NAME
POSITION
ORG.
ADDRESS
PHONE
CELL
EMAIL
Sonia Paredes,
Responsable ESRI
Micro-red
Chachapoyas
Joaquin Tanca,
Chachapoyas
Blanca Joaquim
Jose Raul Ayala,
Responsable SIS,
Micro-red
Chachapoyas
Mario Santillan
Informatico
Chachapoyas
John Acuna
Responsable ESRI
Puesto Pipus
Chachapoyas
Richard Llanca
Responsable ESRI
Red Bagua
Chachapoyas
Dra. Martinez
Responsables ESRI
Red
Chachapoyas
Abad, Abel
Utcubamba
Bustamante,
Yesenia
Barreto,
Edward Ciezta
Manuel Rivas
Coordinador
DIRESA
Jr. EI Triunfo
UMBRAL
Amazonas
cuadra 3
Chachapoyas
Norma Cruz
Directora de
DIRESA
Jr. EI Triunfo
Promoxion de Salud
Amazonas
cuadra 3
Chachapoyas
Dr Eduardo
Director de
DIRESA
Jr. EI Triunfo
Quezada
Epidemiologia
Amazonas
cuadra 3
Chachapoyas
Rosalia Vargas
Depto. Atencion
DIRESA
Jr. EI Triunfo
Integral de Salud
Amazonas
cuadra 3
Chachapoyas
Dr. Carlos
Director General
DIRESA
Av. Daniel A.
083-321117,
Carloshmg2@hotmail.com
Hernan
Apurimac
Carrion,
083-323690
Monteagudo
Abancay
Gonsalez
Jose
Responsables AISPED
DIRESA
Av. Daniel A.
Portacarrero,
Apurimac
Carrion,
Liliana Santillan
Abancay
Rosa Lopez P.
OAUM
DIREMID
Av. Danei
083-321117,
rosemilopez@yahoo.es
Apurimac
Alcides s/n
083-323690
Maria I.
Director Estadistica
DIRESA
Av. Daneil
083-321117,
Mariaccahuana@yahoo.es
Ccahuana T.
Apurimac
Alcides s/n
083-323690
Segundino
Tecnico en Cadena
DIRESA
Av. Daneil
083-321117,
Serrano L.
de Frio
Apurimac
Alcides s/n
083-323690
Teofilo Caceres
Coordinador ESRI
DIRESA
Av. Daneil
083-321117,
Tecalle.007@gmail.com
LI.
Apurimac
Alcides s/n
083-323690
Carmen Luz
Directora de
DIRESA
Av. Danei
083-321117,
Luzluna3@hotmail.com
Luna G.
Promocion
Apurimac
Alcides s/n
083-323690
93
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
Miriam Monzon
Supervisora ESNI
MINSA
Miriam monzonc@hotmail.com
C.
NAME
POSITION
ORG.
ADDRESS
PHONE
CELL
EMAIL
Jorge Luis Ruiz
Director de Atencion
DIRESA
Av. Daneil
983672774
Geisiztol5@hotmail.com
P.
Integral de la Salud
Apurimac
Alcides s/n
Miryam
Responsable
Micro-red
Abancay
iryam 25Z@hotmail.com
Solorzano C.
Estrategia Vacuancion
Centenario
Leoncio
Responsable cadena
Micro-red
Abancay
Yupanqui
de frio
Centenario
Mayra Giannina
Directora Imagen
DIRESA
Av. Danei
083-321117,
Mayrita-21@hotmail.com
Estrada A.
Institucional
Apurimac
Alcides s/n
083-323690
Maria Povez A.
Coordinadora
DIRESA
Av. Daneil
083-321117,
mapoveza@yahoo.es
AISPED
Apurimac
Alcides s/n
083-323690
Darwin Pezo
Director LRSP
Abancay
darwinpezo@hotmail.com
O.
Elsa Alfaro A.
Responsable de
DIRESA
Av. Daneil
083-321117,
Ecalfaro73@gmail.com
PROMS Vida Sana
Apurimac
Alcides s/n
083-323690
Juan Saavedra
Director Ejec.
DIRESA
Av. Danei
083-321117,
Juansr40@hotmail.com
R.
Recursos Humanos
Apurimac
Alcides s/n
083-323690
Carlos A.
DESP
DIRESA
Av. Daneil
083-321117,
Carloespnl9 83@hotmail.com
Villanueva L.
Apurimac
Alcides s/n
083-323690
Marcelina
C.S. Pueblo Joven
Abancay
Marcey260y99@hotmail.com
Gamarra C.
Luzmila
Coordinador Etapa
DIRESA
Av. Daneil
083-321117,
luzmilacoflores@hotmail.com
Consoyo F.
Nino
Apurimac
Alcides s/n
083-323690
Aurora
Responsable ESRI
C.S.
Abancay
C.LL.I8@hotmail.com
Caceres LI.,
Tamburco
Hilda Reinoso
Agustina
Digitadora SIS
C.S.
Abancay
Chacon
Tamburco
Elias Gomez A.
ODSIS
DIRESA
Av. Daneil
083-321117,
egomez@sis.gob.pe
Apurimac
Alcides s/n
083-323690
Gabino
Responsable ESRI
Red
Chalhuanco,
Villafuerta
Chalhuanco
Apurimac
Virgilio
Ex SIS, Enfermera
Red
Chalhuanco,
Cespedes,
ESRI
Chalhuanco
Apurimac
Rosemery
Quispe
Jose Lizarraga
Gerente de
Gobierno
Abancay,
083-324084
983702820
jomolisto@hotmail.com
Desarrollo Social
Regional
Apurimac
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
94
ANNEX F REGIONAI COMPARISON TABLE
Table 2 beginning on the next page compares regions by Assessment Question.
95
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
Table 2. COMPARISON OF REGIONS BY ASPECTS OF ASSESSMENT QUESTION I.
COMPONENTI
AMAZONAS
APURIMAC
CUSCO
ASPECT
PUNO
(a) What were the effects and achievements of the MCC-ITP in the region, program including but not limited to:
Impact of the MCC-ITP
2I registered for
17 registered for
VDIM-I people
49 registered for VDIM
in the region
VDIM course.
VDIM course.
completed3| the
course
Cold room
Cold room not
course, but
41 community health
installed/functioning
functioning
certificates have not
agents trained and child
All cold chain assets in
All cold chain assets in
been distributed yet.
database created
SIGA-patrimonic
SIGA-patrimonio
AISPED equipment
None of the staff were
IEC Toolkit not used
IEC Toolkit being
distributed to 8 IBs
able to complete VDIM
IIIS totally blocked by
used by
5 AISPED training
course due to internet
Statistics
Communications
workshops, 35 staff
access problems
Officer Institutional
and 7 trainers trained
AISPED equipment
Image
Entered 744 cold
distributed.
IIIS being used in
chain assets into
Four people trained in
Abancay sub-region
regional inventory
IGA-patrimonial. 42
Regional immunization
cold chain items were
plan developed and
entered in the regional
approved
SIGA inventory
8 IB (40 staff) trained
and equipped and 10
AISPED trainers
trained
Factors that hindered
Changing health priorities
Population has
Staff turnover
Staff turnover. Puno had 3
effectiveness
due to frequent turnover
migrated and is
Population is over-
directors in the last 18
of local officials
overestimated.
estimated, with
months.
Increased complexity
denominator based on
Up to 33%
of vaccination
projections and not
underestimated
schedule
actua # of births
population. Inaccurate
Inaccurate numerator
denominator based on
due to high population
projections and not actual
mobility.
# of births.
Inaccurate numerator due
to high population
mobility
31 Cusco End of MCC-ITP Report
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
96
COMPONENTI
AMAZONAS
ASPECT
APURIMAC
CUSCO
PUNO
Factors that facilitated
Excellent ITP
Excellent ITP
Excellent ITP
Excellent ITP
effectiveness
coordinator
coordinator
coordinator
coordinator
VDIM
VDIM
Planning skills for
Planning skills for
Trainings
Trainings
Budget for Results.
Budget for Results.
Sound studies and
Tailored
evidence to tailor
communication
communication
materials in various
activities
local languages
40 community health
Communication
agents trained in
workshops for
communication
community leaders and
health staff.
Community
Surveillance workshops
in 25 facilities
Reasons for difference
No reasons can be given
No reasons can be given
No reasons can be given
No reasons can be given
in immunizations
because C-DHS
because C-DHS
because C-DHS
because C-DHS coverage
coverage outcomes
coverage reports are
coverage reports are
coverage reports are
reports are inconclusive
within and among
inconclusive and OGEI
inconclusive and OGEI
inconclusive and OGEI
and OGEI reports are
regions that received
reports are distorted by
reports are distorted by
reports are distorted by
distorted by incomplete
MCC-ITP support
incomplete reporting
incomplete reporting
incomplete reporting
reporting
COMPONENTI
ASPECT
AMAZONAS
APURIMAC
CUSCO
PUNO
(b)
What is the post MCC-ITP status of development of the regional immunizations program including but not limited to:
POLITICAL
High priority accorded by
High priority accorded by
High priority accorded by
High priority accorded by
PRIORITY AT THE
regional president and
regional social
regional social
regional Social
DIFFERENT LEVELS;
DIRESA
development manager
development manager
Development Manager
and DIRESA
and DIRESA
and DIRESA
FUNDING
Excellent funding support
Excellent funding support
Adequate funding.
Adequate funding.
MECHANISMS AT
from MEF via PpR.
from MEF via PpR.
Expressed need to
Expressed need to
THE DIFFERENT
Growing municipal and
Weak municipal support
program funds
improve capacity of
LEVELS
private sector support
due to inadequate
appropriately
networks to program
(NATIONAL, SUB-
due to close
communicatior with
funds and recruit staff
NATIONAL);
communication with
health staff.
health staff.
97
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
COMPONENTI
ASPECT
AMAZONAS
APURIMAC
CUSCO
PUNO
NORMS AND
All service norms and
All service norms and
All forms available and
All forms available and
PROCEDURES
procedures followed; IIIS
procedures followed; SIS
norms followed
norms followed
IMPLEMENTATION,
reporting through SIS is
reporting is undergoing
MONITORING AND
blocked by Directoral
revision because of AUS;
IMPROVEMENT;
decree; cold chain norms
cold chain norms
followed.
followed
HUMAN
Regional and network
Increased number of
High staff turnover
High staff turnover
RESOURCES
personne responsible for
professional nurses. At
STAFFING
ESRI was trained with
least 5 took VDIM course
Competent staff
Short of staff nurses,
QUALITY AND
VDIM. Professional
and have replaced health
observed
expressed need to
QUANTITY;
nurses have replaced
technicians. Regional and
recruit and renew
health technicians in most
network staff responsible
contracts
vaccination sites very
for ESRI was trained with
competent.
VDIM, competent
Observed staff
competence
MANAGERIAL AND
High managerial and
High managerial and
High managerial capacity
High managerial capacity
ADMINISTRATIVE
administrative capacity at
administrative capacity at
but staff turnover
but staff turnover.
CAPACITY AT
regional and network
regional and network
NATIONAL AND
level. Facility level
level. Facility leve
Expressed need to
Expressed need to
SUB-NATIONAL
capacity weak in
capacity weak in
improve capacity at
improve capacity at
LEVEL (REGIONAL,
secondary positions.
secondary positions.
network and
network and
PROVINCIAL,
micronetwork levels
micronetwork levels
MUNICIPAL OR
DISTRICT) TO
PLAN, IMPLEMENT
AND MONITOR
IMMUNIZATIONS;
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
98
INFORMATION
The regional
The most recent
The epidemiologic
The most recent
AND
epidemiology office does
epidemiologic bulletin is
bulletin is up to date. The
epidemiologic bulletin is
EPIDEMIOLOGICA
not publish epidemiologic
of out of date. The last
latest issue reported a
out of date. The latest
L SURVEILLANCE
bulletins on the DIRESA
bulletin announced a 45%
measles outbreak in
issue reported thirteen
DATA QUALITY
website. It does monitor
reduction in severe
Ecuador and the
cases of rubella that
AND USE;
notifications and
pneumonia to date,
reintroduction of a wild
were discarded based on
investigates outbreaks of
compared to the same
virus of measles and
laboratory studies and
VP diseases, but does not
time period in 2010. The
emphasized the need "to
reported one case of
inform vaccination
EDAs also decreased by
strengthen surveillance
whooping cough.
coverage
15% of reported cases
and to reinforce
Pneumonia reportedly
from 2010 and dysenteric
prevention and control."
decreased from forty-
diarrhea decreased by
It also reported seven
nine cases in 2010 to
17% compared with
probable cases of rubella
thirty-three cases in
2010. Vaccination
that were discarded
20II. Vaccination
coverage was not
based on laboratory
coverage was not
reported.
results. The bulletin also
reported.
announced that MMR
vaccination coverage rate
for the Cusco region did
not reach 95% in 2010.
DEGREE OF
The pockets of
The DGE estimates that
The DGE estimates that
The DGE estimates that
PROTECTION
unvaccinated population,
there are 300,000
there are 300,000
there are 300,000
ACHIEVED, THE
especially in border
persons who do not
persons who do not
persons who do not
LEVEL OF RISK
regions, is of major
make antibodies to
make antibodies to
make antibodies to
AND EPIDEMIC
concern because of low
mumps and measles and
mumps and measles and
mumps and measles and
POTENTIAL;
levels of MMR
perhaps 500,000
perhaps 500,000
perhaps 500,000
vaccination rates in
susceptible to polio. If
susceptible to polio. If
susceptible to polio. If
Condorcanqui and Jaen,
proportional to
proportional to
proportional to
on Peru's northern
population, in Apurimac,
population, in Cusco, this
population, in Puno, this
border. Children non-
this would amount to
would amount to 12448
would amount to 13479
responsive
4925 and 7158 children,
and 20747 children,
and 22466 children,
respectively.
respectively.
respectively.
INVOLVEMENT OF
The national VP disease
The national VP disease
The national VP disease
The national VP disease
NATIONAL
surveillance unit is
surveillance unit is
surveillance unit is
surveillance unit is
SURVEILLANCE
responsible for
responsible for
responsible for
responsible for
SYSTEM FOR
monitoring and
monitoring and
monitoring and
monitoring and
DETECTING AND
investigating all reported
investigating all reported
investigating all reported
investigating all reported
CONTROLLING
cases of VP diseases from
cases of VP diseases from
cases of VP diseases from
cases of VP diseases from
VACCINE-
over 7000 health facilities
over 7000 health facilities
over 7000 health facilities
over 7000 health facilities
PREVENTABLE
in the country, through
in the country, through
in the country, through
in the country, through
DISEASES;
the regional
the regional
the regional
the regional
epidemiologist in
epidemiologist in
epidemiologist in Cusco
epidemiologist in Puno
Amazonas who reports
Apurimac who reports all
who reports all
who reports all
99
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
all outbreaks of VP
outbreaks of VP diseases.
outbreaks of VP diseases.
outbreaks of VP diseases.
diseases.
COLD CHAIN
Cold room operating
Cold room installed but
Two cold rooms
Building to house cold
FUNCTIONALITY
since Oct 2010, All of
lacking electrical
functioning since 2010.
rooms is under
SUPPLY
the facilities visited store
connection. All of the
All of the facilities visited
construction. All of the
QUANTITY AND
vaccines in refrigerators
facilities visited store
store vaccines in electric
facilities visited store
QUALITY;
and freezers that are
vaccines in electric
refrigerators and freezers
vaccines in electric
between two and five
refrigerators and freezers
that are between two
refrigerators and
years old, are electric,
that are between two
and five years old and
freezers that are
and function adequately
and five years old and
function with
between two and five
(consistent temperatures
function with
temperatures according
years old and function
according to norms).
temperatures according
to norms. Al staff in the
with temperatures
Local technicians are
to norms. In some areas
facilities reported that
according to norms. In
adapting domestic
of rural Apurimac, there
they have adequate stock
some areas of rural
refrigerators for solar
are still a number of
for routine vaccinations.
Puno, there are stil a
power
domestic/household
number of
refrigerators
domestic/household
refrigerators
BIOSECURITY
Al facilities used
All facilities used
All facilities used
All facilities used
PRACTICES IN THE
disposable syringes. Most
disposable syringes. Most
disposable syringes. Most
disposable syringes. Most
HANDLING AND
immunization services
immunization services
immunization services
immunization services
DISPOSAL OF
discarded their syringes
discarded their syringes
discarded their syringes
discarded their syringes
USED SYRINGES
in MOH-provided,
in MOH-provided,
in MOH-provided,
in MOH-provided,
AND VIALS; AND
cardboard security
cardboard security
cardboard security boxes
cardboard security
boxes. In Pipus, the
boxes.
boxes. In rural sites, the
security boxes were put
security boxes were put
into a fenced and were
into a fenced and were
set on fire by staff.
set on fire by staff.
ACHIEVEMENTS IN
Communication is
The institutional
Health staff
The Team observed a
SOCIAL
excellent. One nurse
communications director
communicated actively,
nurse communicating
COMMUNICATION
communicated
of DIRESA/Apurimac has
explaining the
with mothers and infants
AND THE DEGREE
particularly well with a
used the brochures and
vaccinations, discussing
in a warm, welcoming
OF USER
pair of agitated parents
other tools, in Spanish
any adverse reactions to
way, explaining the
SATISFACTION
who were sure that the
and in Quechua. She
be expected, counseling
vaccinations, showing the
SERVICE QUALITY,
rotavirus vaccination
informed the Team that
on home-based care of
schedules, and
QUANTITY, AND
given at the last visit had
she has plans to train 100
fever, swelling, and pain.
vaccinating the children
DEMAND; AND
given the child diarrhea.
newspaper media
However, parents were
in a friendly and
She patiently listened,
persons and give them
not able to say which
supportive manner.
provided information,
the messages after these
vaccines had been
discussed myths that
are properly adapted for
administered. This
others had told the
the region.
perhaps is due to the
mother, and explained
Communications in
large number of vaccines
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
100
why they were not true.
vaccination services were
and to names unrelated
She communicated in a
generally one-way, from
to the diseases they
calm and supportive
the staff to the mother,
prevent.
manner with the parents,
and staff did not appear
who then let her
to be able to draw
vaccinate the child.
mothers into dialogue.
CAPACITY TO
The Condorcanqui
Personnel readily
Personnel readily
The Puno POI was
ADAPT TO NEW
region adapted upright
adopted distance-
adopted distance-
adapted from MOH
DEMANDS
refrigerators so they
learning technology for
learning technology for
norms regarding
GENERATED BY
would lie horizontally
the Virtual Immunization
the Virtual Immunization
immunization schedule,
HEALTH SECTOR
and adapted condensers
Management Diploma
Management Diploma
priority vaccines,
REFORM,
to work with solar
course. Apurimac is
course. The Cusco POI
historical coverage by
INCLUDING
power. Personnel readily
notable for adaptation to
adapted MOH norms
districts, RIS
DECENTRALIZATI
adopted distance-
increased storage
regarding immunization
organizational and
ON, UNIVERSAL
learning technology for
requirements of mono-
schedule, priority
functional structure,
HEALTH
the VDIM Diploma
dose vaccines, the use of
vaccines, historical
staffing and resources.
INSURANCE,
course. The DIRESA
data loggers with digital
coverage by districts, RIS
INTEGRATION OF
developed the NovHIS
computer readouts to
organizational and
IMMUNIZATIONS
software for its health
monitor temperatures of
functional structure,
INTO MATERNAL
information system. The
the horizontal
staffing and resources.
AND CHILD
Regional President
refrigerators and
HEALTH
discussed the use of the
freezers.
PROGRAMS, AND
bar codes on the DNI to
THE INCLUSION
give access to social
OF NEW
services and allow
TECHNOLOGIES
tracking of
AND VACCINES.
immunizations and other
services.
10I
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
COMPONENTI
ASPECT
AMAZONAS
APURIMAC
CUSCO
PUNO
(c) How has the regional immunizations program progressed since the close of the MCCITP, in terms of but not limited to:
ADHERENCE TO
Four Amazonas-specific
Three of ten Apurimac-
Six out of seventeen
Eleven out of thirty-four
REGION-SPECIFIC
recommendations out of
specific recommendations
pending recommendations
pending recommendations
RECOMMENDATIO
8 are currently being
pending.
reported to have been
reported to have been
NS PROVIDED BY
undertaken:
completed
completed
MCC-ITP;
-Use PpR to create clear
I. Form community
incentives for analysis and
surveillance
use of information
committees.
-Continue PpR budgeting to
2. Distribute VDIM
increase funding for
certificates.
operating expenses
3. Redistribute assigned
-Make/distribute copies of
population to adjust
the VDIM modules for
denominator.
individual study.
100% of children under
five have DNI.
DEMONSTRATED
DIRESA/AmazonaS has
Apurimac has an annual
Cusco has an annual
Puno budgeted 150,000
COMMITMENT TO
increased the number of
operational immunization
operational immunization
soles (over $55,000 USD)
CONTINUED
nurse positions for the
plan which includes a
plan, as did both
from the regiona
IMPROVEMENT OF
immunization program
budget in PpR format.
networks visited. These
government in 201 I an
IMMUNIZATIONS
and has an annual
When the DIRESA could
plans include a budget,
d a similar amount in the
PROGRAM;
operational immunization
not instal the cold room
usually in PpR format.
2012 budget for the new
plan, as did Bagua and
because the electrical
DIRESA storage facility,
Utcubamba networks.
supply was insufficient, a
where the cold room can
These plans include a
new transformer was
finally be installed. Puno
budget in PpR format.
purchased with Program
has an annual operational
The new director of the
for Support of Health
immunization plan, as did
DIRESA has agreed to
Reforms (PARSALUD)
both networks visited.
report immunization
funds. A new annual
These plans include a
coverage to the regional
preventive maintenance
budget, in PpR format.
president. The regional
plan, a communications
president stated that
plan, and actions to
immunizations were one
assure the rapid
of his three health
completion of the cold
priorities.
room demonstrated
commitment to improving
the immunization
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
102
COMPONENTI
AMAZONAS
APURIMAC
CUSCO
PUNO
ASPECT
program.
SUSTAINABILITY
The MEF is supporting the
The VDIM-trained
VDIM-trained managers in
The VDIM-trained
OF RESULTS
Amazonas vaccination
managers are sustaining
key RIS positions.
regional and network
ACHIEVED AT END
activities through PpR
results of the ITP. Funding
PpR is used effectively by
managers.
OF THE MCC-ITP;
budgets as part of the
is guaranteed by MEF
DIRESA and networks.
MEF support through PpR
AND
priority, national strategy.
support to the Apurimac
IEC Toolbox being used
budgets as part of
The NIS is implemented
vaccination activities
in five languages.
national nutrition
through well-trained,
through PpR. The SIS is
strategy.
experienced regional and
working closely with RIS
network managers.
to continue IIIS
operations.
EXTENT TO
The IIIS rejected by the
Data input to the IIIS is
IIIS is not operating due
IIIS is not operating.
WHICH TOOLS
regional statistics office
operating. No regiona
to lack of followup
AISPED trainers not be in
PRODUCED BY THE
which has implemented
reports are being
AISPED trainers not in
position anymore.
MCC-ITP ARE
NovHis. IEC toolboxes
produced. The IEC
position anymore.
Some VDIM modules
BEING USED, AND
were not being used. The
toolbox being used by the
VDIM has not been
have been replicated by
WHY ARE OR
GIS was unknown
communications office.
offered again.
the RIS coordinator
AREN'T THEY
No GIS.
BEING USED.
103
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
ANNEX G OTHER RELEVANT INFORMATION
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
104
ANNEX G.I MAPS OF SITES VISITED
REGION AMAZONAS
105
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
REGION APURIMAC
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
106
REGION CUSCO
107
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
REGION PUNO
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
108
ANNEX G.2 STATUS OF COLD ROOM INSTALLATIONS
109
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
ANNEX G.3 REGIONAL PENDING ACTIONS AMAZONAS
Increase demand for use of information and analysis in all sub-processes of vaccination by strengthening
monitoring and evaluation systems.
1. Use the PpR to create clear incentives for analysis and use of information
2. Continue PpR budgeting to increase funding for operating expenses in the regions.
3. Establish clear guidelines for the introduction of new vaccines that include the assessment of financial
sustainability not only for the purchase of vaccines, but for logistics at the regional level.
4. Evaluate the cost effectiveness of strengthening routine immunization VS. national campaigns.
5. Place the virtual training modules of the Immunization Management course on the DIRESA Amazonas
website
6.
Replicate the training program and materials for IBs at the regional level
7. The operational norm for IBs should consider training.
8. Place the training modules for IBs on the DIRESA Amazonas website.
9. Conduct replication and induction workshops for new immunization staff.
10. Ensure that 100% of children under five years have ID, which will identify and locate the
10-15% of children who are not vaccinated annually.
11. Expansion of GIS to all DIRESAs and other sectors (education).
12. Present the KAP study and socialize content.
13. Build regional capacity to adapt and reproduce IEC materials for the community from the program.
14. Implement IEC campaigns to strengthen immunization interventions at district and community levels.
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
110
ANNEX G.4 REPORTE DE LA ENCUESTA POR EMAIL SOBRE DIPLOMADO EN GESTION
DE INMUNIZACIONES
Correos remitidos
1,884
Direcciones no validas
271
Correos con destinatario valido
1,613
Respuestas:
252 en total (Tasa de respuesta, 15.6%)
241 iniciaron el curso
2 que se negaron a responder las preguntas
9 refieren ser tutores O autoridades
Completaron el Diploma
181 (72.4%), el 27.6% abandonaron el Diploma antes de
completarlo, basicamente por dificultades de conectividad a
Internet.
De los que completaron, 113 recibieron su Diploma (62.4%), lo que implicaria que en nuestra muestra, 37.6% de los
respondientes manifiestan no haber recibido su Diploma a pesar de haber completado el Curso. Even when this
answer may not be representative of the total of course alumni, this would mean that there is a group, which is very
uncomfortable about this.
Alter one year of completion, almost 2/3, 67.1% (IC95 60.7 - 73.0%) is still working on Immunizations, and 97.4%
(IC95 94.4 - 99.0%) consider the Diploma improved their competencies (regardless if they are or not currently in
immunizations).
218 de los respondientes, incluyeron recomendaciones. De estas, las mas frecuentes fueron:
50 (22.9%)
Ampliar O repetir el Diploma para mas participantes.
41 (18.8%)
Entregar los Diplomas a quienes concluyeron el curso.
34 (15.6%)
Permitir a los que abandonaron, completar el Diploma
25 (11.5%)
Dictar actualizaciones para quienes ya hicieron el Diploma.
22 (10.1%)
Recomendaciones pedagogicas (mayor cumplimiento por los tutores, etc)
12 (5.5%)
Que se ofrezcan otros Diplomados virtuales.
7 (3.2%)
Que se hagan reuniones presenciales periodicas.
7 (3.2%)
Que se proyecte una Especialidad para los que ya hicieron el Diploma.
5 (2.6%)
Profundizar O actualizar contenidos (Inmunobiologia, Data loggers, etc)
4 (2.1%)
Otros Diplomados presenciales.
3 (1.4%)
Modificar el documento para que tenga valor oficial.
III
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
ANNEX G.5 THRESHOLD PROGRAMS LESSONS LEARNED
ANNEX G.6 MCC PERU INDICATORS
USAID/PERU MCC-IPT Assessment Report
112
MILLENNIUM
CHALLENGE CORPORATION
Fact Sheet
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
December 16, 2010 www.mcc.gov
MCC Threshold Program Lessons Learned
Introduction
The Threshold Program, authorized under section 616 of the Millennium Challenge Act of 2003 (as amended),
is intended to help candidate countries become eligible for an MCC Compact. Using the incentive of a potential
MCC Compact, the Threshold Program is meant to encourage partner countries to design and undertake a chal-
lenging reform program.
The first generation of individual country programs was designed to be short-term and provide countries with an
opportunity to improve performance on MCC's eligibility indicators through broad-based policy and institutional
reforms. Design efforts for these early programs focused on rapid deployment of substantial technical and financial
resources to generate ambitious results within a two-year window. Staff in the field worked aggressively to program
substantial amounts of democracy and governance funding with few past models to which to refer for guidance.
To assess whether the Threshold Program was achieving its policy and program objectives, MCC conducted a
year-long review that analyzed the current portfolio, consulted a broad range of external stakeholders, and gath-
ered input from USAID, which typically works in partnership with MCC to implement the Threshold Program
MCC has also completed independent program evaluations of the threshold programs in Malawi and Zambia and
an impact evaluation of the program in Burkina Faso.
The findings from the review and these evaluations contributed to the development of a body of Threshold
Program "lessons learned" that will be applied to future MCC threshold programs. MCC will continue consulta-
tions and will provide further detail on how these lessons will be applied.
The Threshold Program has proved to be a useful tool for engaging non-eligible countries in constructive policy
dialogues. Using a country threshold program to improve performance on MCC's eligibility indicators within
a narrow time frame, however, has not been effective in most cases. The Threshold Program has expanded and
strengthened the U.S. Government's dialogue with threshold country partners and has created an opportunity for
MCC to support country-driven institutional reforms using the incentive of potential Compact eligibility.
MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORPORATION
Past Threshold Programs have produced significant achievements, including a streamlined business registration
process that helped lower the number of days to register a business from 39 to five in Albania; improved vaccina-
tion rates in Peru; and a newly formed anti-corruption unit that has tried and convicted three high-profile cases
in Uganda. The program is also a valuable tool for providing information to MCC's Board of Directors regarding a
country's commitment to reform and the prospects of partnership through an MCC Compact.
By employing broad technical expertise from across the U.S. Government, MCC has been able to bring together
the relative strengths of MCC, USAID, and other U.S. Government counterparts in a strong partnership for
economic growth in its Threshold Program countries. MCC plans to continue to strengthen these partnerships in
future threshold programs.
I essons earned
In response to the year-long review and the first set of evaluations, MCC has drawn the following key lessons that
will be applied to the Threshold Program going forward:
Lesson one: Link threshold programs to indicators and goals that are actionable and measurable within a
relatively short period of time.
While MCC eligibility indicators are useful for comparing peer countries' performance on a range of policy mea-
sures for the purposes of selecting partner countries, they are generally ill-suited for the task of measuring the im-
pact of threshold programs. Because several of the eligibility indicators measure institutional performance broadly
within an area of governance (for example, rule of law), and because programmatic interventions are necessarily
focused in scope, these indicator scores reflect performance well beyond a threshold program's interventions. As
a result, it is often difficult to attribute changes in the eligibility indicators to program interventions or to measure
progress in a timely manner. Future threshold programs will assist countries in becoming Compact-eligible by
focusing on country-specific policy reforms linked to impediments to growth. Progress will be assessed against
measurable metrics that partner governments can act upon within well-specified time frames. This will serve to
strengthen the logic underpinning the Threshold Program and to more closely align it with MCC's goal of creating
policy environments conducive to reducing poverty through growth.
Lesson two: Deepen diagnostic and feasibility analysis and identify the connection of activities to outputs,
outcomes and impacts during program preparation.
As a first step, where appropriate, MCC will carry out diagnostics of binding policy and institutional constraints
to growth. These diagnostics will focus program design on reforms in key sectors. Feasibility of proposed activities
will then be examined and will include an assessment of the related political economy. Finally, a clear program
logic linking activities to outputs, outcomes and impacts will be articulated during the design phase.
MCC Threshold Program Lessons Learned, December 16, 2010
2
MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORPORATION
MCC will devote increased resources and time to the preparation of threshold programs and will rely more heavily
on in-house experts to develop programs. This strengthened due diligence process will allow MCC to more sys-
tematically analyze links between activities and expected impacts, and to calculate and weigh risks explicitly before
approving a program. As a result, future country partners will benefit from good program design and realistic
expectations of results.
Lesson three: Be more selective when determining program interventions and establish a consultative pro-
cess to tailor focus areas.
A more structured approach to program development will contribute to a more narrow focus on policy and
institutional reforms relevant to growth. These reforms will be concentrated in areas in which governments are
inclined to undertake reforms due to favorable political support and sufficient technical capacity. More narrowly-
defined programs will facilitate oversight and management. A broader consultative process will also serve as an
additional measure of feasibility and help ensure that the reforms sought by the Threshold Program will have the
necessary degree of country ownership and political support to be truly sustainable.
Lesson four: Establish outcome-level goals that are appropriate for the timeframe.
Threshold Programs often support policy and institutional reforms that require a gestation period before tangible
results can be captured. In the first generation of programs, short timelines meant that external factors - such
as vacancies in key host-country government agencies, normal politica turnover, or lack of buy-in from new
government leaders could cause critical delays in implementation. In more recent threshold programs, MCC has
integrated targets that are achievable in the two or three-year program time frame and reflect the partner country's
capacity and the anticipated gestation period. The process for setting higher-level targets, i.e., results emanating
from trainings or the establishment of an anti-corruption unit, will continue to improve as due diligence efforts are
expanded.
Lesson five: Identify champions of reform at multiple levels, including the leaders of institutions targeted
for reforms, and build in safeguards.
When a threshold program targets a risky reform, political support must exist at multiple levels, ranging from
the ministerial level to the leaders of a department or agency where the reform is specifically targeted In addition
to this support, attention must be focused on appropriate programmatic sequencing, particularly when enabling
legislation is a precondition for the reform. When legislative action or the support of relevant leaders is uncertain,
an interim assessment can help determine whether or not MCC assistance should continue. Recent programs,
such as the Kyrgyz Republic's threshold program, built in conditions so that program assistance would be released
only when reform objectives had been met. MCC will continue to increase its focus on integrating such conditions
in future threshold programs.
MCC Threshold Program Lessons Learned, December 16, 2010
3
MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORPORATION
Lesson six: Build in sustainability assurances during program design and early implementation.
Recent threshold programs are working closely with government counterparts to plan and allocate budgets for
post-program sustainability plans. For example, an intervention focused on information technology requires that a
partner government allocate funding and staff to operate the system and conduct troubleshooting during and after
the threshold program. In the Liberia threshold program, funding for some renovation activities and equipment
purchases is contingent upon the development of five-year maintenance and sustainability plan by each recipient
community as part of the education component.
Lesson seven: Increase oversight and monitoring and evaluation of projects to increase prospects for success
and ensure learning during and after program implementation.
The first generation of MCC threshold programs focused on anti-corruption and rule of law reforms an area that
suffers from a dearth of evidence on best practices, the lack of which amplifies the need for strong monitoring and
impact evaluation. However, for the first generation of country threshold programs, baselines for later comparison
and attribution of program results were generally not established. More recently, efforts have been made to better
integrate stronger monitoring and evaluation (M&E) practices into Threshold Programs, including the design and
implementation of impact evaluations. For instance, the Rwanda threshold program randomized the civic engage-
ment and local government capacity-building activities to improve conditions for a rigorous impact evaluation.
MCC's Threshold Program has recently made strides forward by integrating independent program monitoring
in new threshold programs, as well as publishing three independent evaluations; two program evaluations are
also underway. MCC will continue to strengthen its monitoring and evaluation and will use the growing body of
evidence-based data to continue learning and improving future threshold programs.
MCC Threshold Program Lessons Learned, December 16, 2010
4
2010-002-0480-02
Population:
27,562,390
Peru FY07
GNI/Cap: $2,610
LMIC
Ruling Justiv
Political Rights
Civil Liberties
Control of
Government
Rule of Law
Voice and
Corruption
Effectiveness
Accountability
Data
32 (68%)
42 (55%)
-0.08 (39%)
-0.44 (23%)
-0.39 (16%)
0.01 (52%)
Median
25
Median
40
Median
0.00
Median
0.00
Median
0.00
Median
0.00
40
60
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
30
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
40
20
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
20
10
-1.0
-1.0
-1.0
-1.0
0
0
-2.0
-2.0
-2.0
-2.0
'02 '05
'02 '03 '05
'02 '04 '05
'02
'04
'05
'02 '05
'02
'05
Sources: Freedom House
Freedom House
World Bank Institute
World Bank Institute
World Bank Institute
World Bank Institute
Investing In People
Immunization Rates
Health Expenditures
Primary Education
Girls' Primary Education
Expenditures
Completion Rate
Data
82 (26%)
2.29 (16%)
0.99 (17%)
98.9 (75%)
Median
92.5
Median
3.66
Median
1.88%
Median
97.3
100
15
10
130
12
8
80
10 0
9
6
60
70
6
4
40
40
3
2
20
0
0
10
'01 '02 '03 '04 '05
'00 '01 '02 '03 '04
'02 '03 '04 '05 '06
'00 '01 '02 '03 '04
Sources: World Health Org.
World Health Org.
UNESCO/National Sources
UNESCO/World Bank
Economic Freedom
Regulatory Quality
Cost Of Starting A
Days To Start A
Trade Policy
Inflation
Fiscal Policy
Business
Business
Data
0.36 (74%)
32.5 (28%)
72 (13%)
62.2 (52%)
1.60 (90%)
-1.10% (61%)
Median
0.00
Median
19.8
Median
33
Median
62.1
Max.
15
Median
-1.37%
2.0
0
0
100
0
4.50
1.0
50
50
80
2.00
10
-0.50
0.0
100
100
0
e
60
3.00
20
-1.0
150
150
40
-5.50
-2.0
200
200
20
30
-8.00
'02
'05
'02 '04 '06
'02 '04 '06
'02 '04 '06
'01 '03 '05
'01 '03 '05
Sources: World Bank Inst.
Intl. Finance Corp.
Intl. Finance Corp.
Heritage Foundation
Intl. Monetary Fund
National Sources
How to Read this Scorecard: Each MCC Candidate Country receives a scorecard annually assessing performance in 3 policy categories: Ruling Justly, Investing in People,
and Economic Freedom. For each indicator box (from top to bottom): the name of the indicator or policy, the country's data, or score, indicated by a green or red line
representing a passing or failing score. Next to the score, is the country's percentile ranking in its respective Low Income or Lower Middle Income group (0% is worst; 50%
is
the median; 100% is best). Under the score/ranking, is the median score for the respective income group, above which countries have to score in order to pass the indicator
The white box represents a trend line of performance with each red dot assigned to a score on the vertical axis and the year on the horizontal access. The black line running
through the dots represents the current year's median. Data sources are below the box.
For more information regarding the Millennium Challenge Account Selection Process and these indicators, please consult MCC's website: www.mcc.gov
10/6/2006
